<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 11: The Third Battle, and Exploits of Agamemnon</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-11" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Third Battle, and Exploits of Agamemnon</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Renewal of the fight by Agamemnon⁠—His prowess⁠—Hector warned by Iris not to fight till Agamemnon is wounded⁠—Agamemnon disabled⁠—Hector makes great havoc till checked by Ulysses and Diomed⁠—Diomed wounded by Paris, and rescued by Ajax, who rallies the Greeks⁠—Machaon wounded⁠—Conversations of Nestor and Patroclus.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Now did the Morning from her couch beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renowned Tithonus rise, that she might bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light to gods and men, when Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the swift galleys of the Grecian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent baleful Strife, who bore in hand aloft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War’s ensigns. On the huge black ship that brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, in the centre of the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stood, where she might shout to either side⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Telamonian Ajax in his tents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to Achilles, who had ranged their ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At each extreme of the Achaian camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Relying on their valor and strong arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud was the voice, and terrible, in which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She shouted from her station to the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And into every heart it carried strength is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the resolve to combat manfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never yield. The battle now to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seemed more to be desired than the return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their dear country in their roomy ships.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides called aloud, exhorting them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gird themselves for battle. Then he clad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself in glittering brass. First to his thighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bound the beautiful greaves with silver clasps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then fitted to his chest the breastplate given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Cinyras, a pledge of kind intent;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, when he heard in Cyprus that the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were bound for Ilium in their ships, he sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This gift, a homage to the king of men;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ten were its bars of tawny bronze, and twelve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were gold, and twenty tin; and on each side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were three bronze serpents stretching toward the neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curved like the colored bow which Saturn’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sets in the clouds, a sign to men. He hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sword, all glittering with its golden studs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About his shoulders. In a silver sheath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It nestled, which was slung on golden rings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he took his shield, a mighty orb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nobly wrought and strong and beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound with ten brazen circles. On its disk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were twenty bosses of white tin, and one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of tawny bronze just in the midst, where glared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Gorgon’s-head with angry eyes, round which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were sculptured Fear and Flight. Along its band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of silver twined a serpent wrought in bronze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With three heads springing from one neck and formed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into an orb. Upon his head he placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A helmet rough with studs on every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with four bosses, and a horse-hair plume</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That nodded fearfully on high. He took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hand two massive spears, brass-tipped and sharp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shone afar and sent their light to heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Juno and Minerva made a sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like thunder in mid-sky, as honoring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sovereign of Mycenae rich in gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Each chief gave orders to his charioteer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stay his horses firmly by the trench,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While they rushed forth in arms. At once arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere yet the sun was up, a mighty din.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They marshalled by the trench the men on foot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horse came after, with short space between.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Saturn sent among their ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confusion, and dropped down upon the host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dews tinged with blood, in sign that he that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would send to Hades many a valiant chief.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Trojans, on their side, in the mid-plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew up their squadrons on a hill, around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty Hector, and Polydamas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blameless, and Aeneas, who among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of Troy was honored like a god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And three sons of Antenor, who were named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agenor and the noble Polybus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the young Acamas of godlike bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There Hector in the van uplifted bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His broad round shield. As some portentous star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breaks from the clouds and shines, and then again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enters their shadow, Hector thus appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the foremost, issuing his commands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sought the hindmost. All in brass, he shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like lightnings of the Aegis-bearer, Jove.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As when two lines of reapers, face to face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In some rich landlord’s field of barley or wheat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Move on, and fast the severed handfuls fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, springing on each other, they of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they of Argos smote each other down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And neither thought of ignominious flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They met each other man to man; they rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like wolves to combat. Cruel Strife looked on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoicing; she alone of all the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was present in the battle; all the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off, sat quiet in their palaces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious mansions built for them along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The summits of Olympus. Yet they all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blamed Saturn’s son that he should honor thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans. The All-Father heeded not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their murmurings, but, seated by himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart, exulting in his sovereignty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked on the city of Troy, the ships of Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gleam of arms, the slayers, and the slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While yet ’twas morn, and still the holy light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of day was brightening, fast the weapons smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either side, and fast the people fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at the hour when on the mountain-slope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wood cutter makes ready his repast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weary with felling lofty trees, and glad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rest, and eager for the grateful meal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks, encouraging each other, charged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And broke the serried phalanxes of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First Agamemnon, springing forward, slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd of his people and their chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bienor, and his trusty comrade next⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charioteer Oileus, who had leaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down from his chariot to confront the king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him Agamemnon with his trenchant spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote in the forehead as he came. The helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of massive brass was vain to stay the blow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon pierced it and the bone, and stained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brain with blood; it felled him rushing on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The monarch stripped the slain, and, leaving them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their white bosoms bare, went on to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Isus and Antiphus, King Priam’s sons⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One born in wedlock, one of baser birth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both in one chariot. Isus held the reins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Antiphus, the high-born brother, fought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These had Achilles once on Ida’s height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made prisoners, as they fed their flocks; he bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their limbs with osier bands, but gave them up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ransom to the Trojans. Now the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men, Atrides Agamemnon, pierced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Isus above the nipple with his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his falchion smiting Antiphus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the ear, he hurled him from his car.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then hastening up, and stripping from the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their shining mail, he knew them; he had seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both at the ships to which the fleet of foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, brought them bound from Ida’s side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a lion comes upon the haunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a swift hind, to make an easy prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her young fawns, and, with his powerful teeth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seizing them, takes their tender lives; while she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though nigh, can bring no aid but yields herself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mortal fear, and, to escape his rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flies swiftly through the wood of close-grown oaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sweaty sides⁠—thus none of all the host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trojans could avert from Priam’s sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fate, but fled in terror from the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next on Pisander and Hippolochus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides rushed⁠—brave warriors both, and sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brave Antimachus, the chief who took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold and rich gifts from Paris, and refused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To let the Trojans render Helen back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fair-haired Menelaus. His two sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both in one car, and reining their fleet steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides intercepted; they let fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The embroidered reins, dismayed, as, lion-like,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forward he came; and, cowering, thus they prayed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Take us alive, Atrides, and accept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A worthy ransom, for Antimachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keeps in his halls large treasures⁠—brass and gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well-wrought steel; and he will send, from these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large ransom, hearing we are at the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alive.” So prayed they with bland words, and met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harsh answer: ” Since ye call Antimachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your father, who in Trojan council once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proposed that Menelaus, whom we sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A legate with Ulysses the divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should not return to Greece, but suffer death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your blood must answer for your father’s guilt.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the king, and, striking with his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pisander’s breast, he dashed him from the car.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prone on the ground he lay. Hippolochus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaped down and met the sword. Atrides lopped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands and drave the weapon through his neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sent the head to roll among the crowd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he left the dead, and rushed to where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ranks were in disorder; with him went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His-well-armed Greeks; there they who fought on foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slaughtered the flying foot; the horsemen there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clove horsemen down: the coursers’ trampling feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised the thick dust to shadow all the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Agamemnon cheered the Achaians on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chased and slew the foe. As when a fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seizes a thick-grown forest, and the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drives it along in eddies, while the trunks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall with the boughs amid devouring flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fell the flying Trojans by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Agamemnon. Many high-maned steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dragged noisily their empty cars among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ranks of battle, never more to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their charioteers, who lay upon the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vulture’s feast, a sorrow to their wives.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Jove beyond the encountering arms, the dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The carnage, and the bloodshed and the din</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore Hector, while Atrides in pursuit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was loudly cheering the Achaians on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime the Trojans fled across the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward the wild fig-tree growing near the tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ancient Ilus, son of Dardanus⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eager to reach the town; and still the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus followed, shouting, and with hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood-stained and dust-begrimed. And when they reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Seaman portals and the beechen tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They halted, waiting for the rear, like beeves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chased panting by a lion who has come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At midnight on them, and has put the herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To flight, and one of them to certain death⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose neck he breaks with his strong teeth and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devours the entrails, lapping up the blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus did Atrides Agamemnon chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans; still he slew the hindmost; still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fled before him. Many by his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell from their chariots prone, for terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all others with the spear was he.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when he now was near the city-wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Father of immortals and of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came down from the high heaven, and took his seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On many-fountained Ida. In his grasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He held a thunderbolt, and this command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave to Iris of the golden wings:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Haste, Iris fleet of wing, and bear my words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hector:⁠—While he sees the king of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides, in the van and dealing death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the ranks of warriors, let him still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give way, encouraging his men to hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unflinching battle with the enemy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when Atrides, wounded by a spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or arrow, shall ascend his chariot, then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will I nerve Hector’s arm with strength to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until he come to the good ships of Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sun set, and hallowed night come down.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and she, whose feet are like the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In swiftness, heeded the command, and flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ida’s summit to the sacred town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy, and found the noble Hector, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of warlike Priam, standing mid the steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the strong chariots, and, approaching, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Hector, son of Priam, and like Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council! Jove the All-Father bids me say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As long as thou shalt see the king of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides, in the van, and dealing death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the ranks of warriors, thou shalt still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give way, encouraging thy men to hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unflinching battle with the enemy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when Atrides, wounded by a spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or arrow, shall ascend his chariot, then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will Jove endue thy arm with strength to slay us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until thou come to the good ships of Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sun set, and hallowed night come down.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So the fleet Iris spake, and went her way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Hector, leaping from his car in arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wielding his sharp spears, went everywhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Trojan ranks, exhorting them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat, and renewed the stubborn fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rallied and stood firm against the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks, in turn, made strong their phalanxes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle raged again, as front to front</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They stood, while Agamemnon eagerly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pressed forward, proud tc lead the van in fight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Say, Muses, dwellers of Olympus! who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First of the Trojans or their brave allies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encountered Atreus’ son? Iphidamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Antenor, strong and daring, bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the rich soil of Thrace, the nurse of flocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His grandsire Cisseus, from whose loins the fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Theano sprang, had reared him from a child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his palace; and, when he attained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youth’s glorious prime, still kept him, giving him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His child to wife. He wedded her, but left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once the bridal chamber when he heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Greek war on Ilium, and set sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With twelve beaked galleys. These he afterward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left at Percope⁠—marching on to Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he it was who came to meet the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus. As the heroes now drew near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other, Agamemnon missed his aim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His thrust was parried. Then Iphidamas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dealt him beneath the breastplate on the belt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vigorous blow, and urged the spear with all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His strength of arm; yet through the plated belt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It could not pierce, for there it met a plate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of silver, and its point was turned like lead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lion strength, Atrides seized and drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon toward him plucked it from the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That held it, and let fall his falchion’s edge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the Trojan’s neck and laid him dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhappy youth! he slept an iron sleep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain fighting for his country, far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the young virgin bride yet scarcely his,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whom large marriage-gifts he made⁠—of beeves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred⁠—and had promised from the flocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thronged his fields a thousand sheep and goats.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides Agamemnon spoiled the slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore his glorious armor off among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Argive host. Antenor’s elder son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious Coön, saw, and bitter grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his slain brother dimmed his eyes. He stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aside, with his spear couched, while unaware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble Agamemnon passed, and pierced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The middle of the monarch’s arm below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The elbow; through the flesh the shining point</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed to the other side. The king of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides, shuddered, yet refrained not then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From combat; but with his wind-seasoned spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rushed on Coön, who, to drag away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father’s son Iphidamas, had seized</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The body by the feet, and called his friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bravest, to his aid. Atrides thrust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brazen spear below the bossy shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slew him as he drew the corpse, and o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead Iphidamas struck off his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus were Antenor’s sons⁠—their doom fulfilled⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent by Atrides to the realm of death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he ranged among the enemy’s ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wielded lance and sword and ponderous stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet the warm blood issued from his wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the wound grew dry, and ceased to flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blood, keen anguish seized his vigorous frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a woman feels the piercing pangs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of travail brought her by the Ilythian maids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughters of Juno, who preside at births,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And walk the ministers of bitter pains⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such anguish seized on Agamemnon’s frame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, leaping to his chariot-seat, he bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guider of the steeds make haste to reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roomy ships, for he was overcome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pain; but first he shouted to the Greeks:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, the chiefs and princes of the Greeks!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yours is the duty to drive back the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From our good ships, since all-disposing Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbids me, for this day, to lead the fight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. The charioteer applied the lash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not unwillingly the long-maned steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew toward the hollow ships; upon their breasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered the foam; beneath their rapid feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose the dust, as from the battle’s din</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They bore the wounded warrior. Hector saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flight of Agamemnon, and aloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called to the Trojans and the Lycians thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Trojan and Lycian warriors, and ye sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Dardanus, who combat hand to hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be men; be mindful of your fame in war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our mightiest foe withdraws; Saturnian Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowns me with glory. Urge your firm-paced steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the brave Greeks, and win yet nobler fame.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. His words gave courage and new strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To every heart. As when a hunter cheers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His white-toothed dogs against some lioness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wild boar from the forest, Hector thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Priam, terrible as Mars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slayer of men, cheered on the gallant sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy against the Greeks. Himself, inspired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fiery valor, rushed among the foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the mid-battle foremost, like a storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That swoops from heaven, and on the dark-blue sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falls suddenly, and stirs it to its depths.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who then was slain the first, and who the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Hector, Priam’s son, whom Jove designed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To honor? First, Asaeus; Uolops, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Clytis; and Autonoüs; and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opites and Opheltius; next to whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aesymnus, Agelaus, Orus fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And resolute Hipponous the last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All these, the princes of the Greeks, he slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then smote the common crowd. As when a gale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blows from the west upon the mass of cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Piled up before the south-wind’s powerful breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tears it with a mighty hurricane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the swoln billows tumble, and their foam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is flung on high before the furious blast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So by the sword of Hector fell the heads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Greek soldiery; and there had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ruin and ravage not to be repaired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the defeated Greeks had flung themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into their ships, had not Ulysses then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exhorted thus Tydides Diomed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Tydides! what has quenched within our hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fiery valor? Come, my friend, and take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy stand beside ma: foul disgrace were ours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should crested Hector make our fleet his prize.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the valiant Diomed replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Most willingly I stand, and bear my part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle; but with little hope, for Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The God of storms, awards the day to Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and pierced Thymbraeus with his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the left breast, and dashed him from his car.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile Ulysses struck Molion down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prince’s stately comrade. These they left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never to fight again, and made their way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the thick squadrons, carrying, as they went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confusion with them. As two fearless boars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rush on the hounds, so, mingling in the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They bore the foe before them, and the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcomed a respite from the havoc made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By noble Hector. Next they seized a car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which bore two chiefs, the bravest of their host⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sons of Percosian Merops, who was skilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all men in portents. He enjoined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sons to keep aloof from murderous war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet did they not obey him, for the fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That doomed the twain to death impelled them on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Diomed, the mighty with the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spoiled them of life, and bore their armor off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A glittering prize. Meantime Ulysses slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hippodamus, and next Hypirochus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Saturn looked from Ida’s height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade the battle rage on either side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With equal fury: both the encountering hosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slew and were slain. Tydides with his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote on the hip the chief Agastrophus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Paeon, thoughtless wretch, whose steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were not at hand for flight; his charioteer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held them at distance, while their master rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the foremost warriors till he fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector perceived his fall, as through the files</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked, and straightway hastened to the spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shouts; and after him came rapidly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The phalanxes of Trojans. Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great in battle, shuddered as he saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus addressed Ulysses, who was near:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lo! the destroyer, furious Hector, comes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us stand firm, and face and drive him back.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He said, and cast his brandished lance, nor missed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mark: it smote the helm on Hector’s head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brass glanced from the brass; it could not pierce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fair skin; the high and threefold helm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gift from Phoebus⁠—turned the point aside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chief fell back, and, mingling with the throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dropped on one knee, and yet upheld himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one broad palm upon the ground, while night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkened his eyes. The son of Tydeus sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seize his spear, which now stood fixed in earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the foremost warriors. In that time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Hector breathe again, and, having leaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his chariot, he avoided death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By mingling with the crowd; while, spear in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave Diomed pursued him, shouting thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This time, thou cur, hast thou escaped thy doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though it was nigh thee. Phoebus rescues thee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The god to whom thou dost address thy prayers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whene’er thou venturest mid the clash of spears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet will I surely slay thee when we meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If any god be on my side; and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go to strike where’er I find a foe.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and struck the son of Paeon down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skilful to wield the spear. But now the spouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fair-haired Helen⁠—Alexander⁠—stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaning against a pillar by the tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Dardanian Ilus, who had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An elder of the people; and he bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bow against the monarch Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who at that moment knelt to strip the slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the rich breastplate, and the shield that hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his shoulders, and the massive ensque.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan drew the bow’s elastic horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sent an arrow that not vainly flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, striking the right foot, pierced through, and reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ground beneath. Then Paris, with a laugh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang from his ambush, shouting boastfully:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lo, thou art smitten! Not in vain my shaft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has flown; and would that it had pierced thy groin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slain thee! Then the Trojans had obtained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reprieve from slaughter⁠—they who dread thee now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As bleating goats a lion.” Undismayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The valiant Diomed made answer thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Archer and railer! proud of thy smart bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ogler of the women! wouldst thou make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trial of valor hand to hand with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy bow should not avail thee, nor thy sheaf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many arrows. Thou dost idly boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou hast hit my foot. I heed it not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is as if a woman or a child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had struck me. Lightly falls the weapon-stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of an unwarlike weakling. ’Tis not so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With me, for when one feels my weapon’s touch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It passes through him, and he dies; his wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tears with her hands her cheeks; his little ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are orphans; earth is crimsoned with his blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flocking round his carcass in decay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More numerous than women, are the birds.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. Ulysses, mighty with the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came near and stood before him while he sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concealed, and drew the arrow from his foot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keen was the agony that suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot through his frame: he leaped into his car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade his charioteer make haste to reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roomy ships: the pain had reached his heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, the great spearman, now was left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, no Greek remaining by his side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fear had seized them all. With inward grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero thus addressed his mighty soul:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What will become of me? A great disgrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will overtake me if I flee in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before this multitude; and worse will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fate if I am taken here alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Jove has driven away the other Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In terror. Why these questions, since I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That cowards skulk from combat, while the brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wounded or wounding others, keeps his ground?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While thus he reasoned with himself, the ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trojans armed with bucklers came and closed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around their dreaded enemy. As when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A troop of vigorous dogs and youths assail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From every side a wild boar issuing forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a deep thicket, whetting the white tusks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his crooked jaws; they press around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hear his gnashings, yet beware to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too nigh the terrible animal⁠—so rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans round Ulysses, the beloved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jupiter. Then first the hero smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deïopites on the shoulder-blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And next struck Thoön down, and Ennomus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the navel pierced Chersidamas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his sharp spear, below the bossy shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When leaping from his chariot. In the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell, and grasped the earth with dying hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses left them there, and with his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wounded Charops, son of Hippasus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brother of brave Socus. Socus saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hastened to his aid, and, standing near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The godlike chief bespake Ulysses thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Renowned Ulysses! of whose arts and toils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no end, thou either shalt today</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boast to have slain two sons of Hippasus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave as they are, and stripped them of their arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, smitten by my javelin, lose thy life.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and smote the Grecian’s orbèd shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift spear, passing through the shining disk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fixed in the rich breastplate, tore the skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all his side; yet Pallas suffered not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blade to reach the inner parts. At once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chief perceived that Socus had not given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mortal wound, and, falling back a step,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus spake: “Unhappy youth, thy doom will soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ertake thee. Though thou forcest me to pause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From combat with the Trojans, I declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This day thou sufferest the black doom of death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, smitten by my spear, shalt bring to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Increase of glory, and shalt yield thy soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the grim horseman Pluto.” Thus he spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Socus turned to flee; and as he turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses with the spear transfixed his back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drave the weapon through his breast: he fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With armor clashing, to the earth, while thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great Ulysses gloried over him:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Socus! son of warlike Hippasus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horseman! death has overtaken thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou couldst not escape. Unhappy one!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now thou art dead thy father will not come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To close thy eyes, nor she, the honored one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who gave thee birth; but birds of prey shall flap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their heavy wings above thee, and shall tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy flesh, while I in dying shall receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due funeral honors from the noble Greeks.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and from his wounded side drew forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from his bossy shield, the ponderous spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which warlike Socus threw. A gush of blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed, and torturing pain. Now, when they saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses bleed, the gallant sons of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called to each other, rushing in a crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where he stood. Retreating as they came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shouted to his comrades. Thrice he raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His voice as loud as human lungs could shout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice warlike Menelaus heard the cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spake at once to Ajax at his side:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Most noble Ajax, son of Telamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prince of thy people! to my ear is brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cry of that unconquerable man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, seemingly as if the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had hemmed him round alone, and pressed him sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In combat. Break we through the crowd, and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Succor, lest harm befall him, though so brave⁠—3⁠–⁠0 Fighting among the Trojans thus alone⁠—And lest the Greeks should lose their mighty chief.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and led the way; his godlike friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed. They found Ulysses, dear to Jove⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans thronging round him like a troop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ravening jackals round an antlered stag</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which one who hunts upon the mountain-side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath stricken with an arrow from his bow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By flight the stag escapes, while yet the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is warm and easily the limbs are moved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when at last the shaft hath quelled his strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hungry jackals in the forest shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the hills attack him, till by chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dreaded lion comes; alarmed, they flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he devours the prey. So in that hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many and brave, the sons of Troy pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, skilled in war and wiles; while he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wielded the spear and warded off the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of death. Then Ajax, coming near him, stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his tall buckler, like a tower of strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside him, and the Trojans fled in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On all sides. Warlike Menelaus took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses by the hand, and led him forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the thronged spot, while his attendant brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chariot near him. Ajax sprang upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans, slaying Doryclus, a son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam basely born. Then Pandorus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wounded; next he struck Lysander down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pyrasus and Pylartes. As a stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swoln to a torrent by the showers of Jove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeps down, from hill to plain, dry oaks and pines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pours into the sea a muddy flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So mighty Ajax routed and pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans o’er the plain, and cut his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through steeds and warriors. Hector knew not this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fought where, on the battle’s left, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Xanthus, fastest fell the slain, and round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Nestor and the brave Idomeneus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose a mighty tumult. In that throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Hector mingle with his spear and steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Performing feats of valor, and laid waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ranks of youthful warriors. Yet the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would not have yielded ground, if Paris, spouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fair-haired Helen, had not forced the chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Machaon, fighting gallantly, to pause;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For with an arrow triple-barbed he pierced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chiefs right shoulder, and the valiant Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feared lest the battle turn and he be slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus Idomeneus to Nestor said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Neleian Nestor, glory of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste, mount thy chariot; let Machaon take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A place beside thee; urge thy firm-paced steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rapidly toward the fleet; a leech like him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who cuts the arrow from the wound and soothes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pain with balms, is worth a host to us.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and the Gerenian knight obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And climbed the car in haste. Machaon, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aesculapius the peerless leech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounted beside him; Nestor lashed the steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And toward the roomy ships, which well they knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And longed to reach, they flew with eager speed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime Cebriones, who had his seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Hector in the chariot, saw the ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy disordered, and addressed the chief:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“While we, O Hector, here are mid the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just in the skirts of the tumultuous fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other Trojans, men and steeds, are thrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into confusion where the warriors throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Telamonian Ajax puts their ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rout; I know him well by that broad shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne on his shoulders. Thither let us drive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our steeds and chariot, where in desperate strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meet horse and foot and hew each other down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a perpetual clamor fills the air.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and with the whistling lash he struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long-maned steeds, and, as they felt the stroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forward they flew with the swift car among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks and Trojans, trampling in their way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Corpses and shields. The axle underneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was steeped in blood; the rim of the chariot-seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was foul with the red drops which from their hoofs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coursers sprinkled and the wheels threw up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Hector strove, by rushing on the crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pierce it and break through it. To the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His coming brought destruction and dismay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well his spear was wielded. Through the ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of other warriors with the spear he ranged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sword and ponderous stones; yet warily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shunned the fight with Ajax Telamon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Father Jove Almighty touched with fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heart of Ajax. All amazed he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast his sevenfold buckler of bull’s-hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his back, and, terrified, withdrew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now casting glances like a beast of prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From side to side, he turned to right and left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, slowly yielding, moved knee after knee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when the rustics with their hounds drive off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hungry lion from their stalls of kine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom, watching all the night, they suffer not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make their herd a prey; but he, intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On ravin, rushes forward, yet in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many a javelin flies from daring hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against him, many a blazing torch is swung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At which, though fierce, he trembles, and at morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stalks off in sullen mood;⁠—so Ajax, sad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At heart, and fearing for the Grecian fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwillingly fell back before the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as, when entering in a field, an ass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow-paced, whose flanks have broken many a shaft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To splinters, crops the harvest as it grows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And boys attack him with their rods⁠—though small</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their strength⁠—but scarce, till he has browsed his fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can drive him forth⁠—so did the gallant sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy, and their allies from distant lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Continually pursue the mighty son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Telamon, and hurl their spears against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The centre of his shield. And now he wheeled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As conscious of great valor, and repulsed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crowding phalanxes; and now again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned to flee. And thus he kept the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From reaching the swift galleys, while he stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the Greeks and Trojans, terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wrath. The javelins hurled by daring hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against him⁠—some hung fixed in his broad shield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many, ere they came to his fair skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell midway⁠—eager though they were to pierce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warrior’s side⁠—and plunged into the earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Eurypylus, Evaemon’s noble son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw Ajax sorely pressed with many darts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came and stood beside him, taking aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his bright spear, and in the liver smote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the midriff, Apisaon, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phausias, and a prince among his tribe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His knees gave way, and down he sank in death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But godlike Alexander, who beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slayer stripping Apisaon’s corpse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of armor, at that moment bent his bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pierced Eurypylus in the right thigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The reed brake in the wound. He writhed with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mingled with his fellows in the ranks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avoiding death, yet shouting to the Greeks:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, the chiefs and leaders of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rally and keep your ground; ward off the fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of death from Ajax, who is sorely pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With darts, and, much I fear, may not escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe from this stormy conflict. Stand ye firm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the mighty son of Telamon.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the wounded warrior; while his friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rallied around him, with their shields inclined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against their shoulders, and with lifted spears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ajax came and joined them; then he turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And firmly faced the foe. The Greeks renewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The combat with a rage like that of fire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now meantime the Neleian coursers, steeped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sweat, were bearing Nestor and the prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Machaon from the battle. On the prow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his great ship, Achilles, swift of foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked forth, and, gazing on the hard-fought fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sad rout, beheld them. Then he called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friend Patroclus, shouting from the ship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus heard, within the tent, and came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glorious as Mars;⁠—yet with that day began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His woes. The gallant Menoetiades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made answer thus: “Why callest thou my name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, and what needest thou of me?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus rejoined Achilles, swift of foot:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Son of Menoetius, nobly born, and well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beloved by me, the Greeks, I deem, will soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be at my knees, imploring aid; for now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hard necessity besets their host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But go, Patroclus, dear to Jove, and ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Nestor who it is that he hath brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus wounded from the field. Seen from behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His form was like Machaon⁠—wholly like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That son of Aesculapius; but the face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw not, as the rapid steeds flew by.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. Patroclus hearkened to his friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hastened to the Grecian tents and ships.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now when they reached the tent of Neleus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warriors in the chariot set their feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the nourishing earth. Eurymedon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man’s charioteer, took from the mares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their harness; while the chieftains cooled themselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dried their sweaty garments in the breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Facing the border of the sea, and then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entering the tent of Nestor, sat them down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On couches. Hecamede, bright of hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prepared for them a mingled draught; the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A daughter of the great Arsinoüs, came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Tenedos with Nestor, when the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was ravaged by Achilles, and the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave her to Nestor, chosen from the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him, as wisest of their counsellors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First she drew forth a table fairly wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of polished surface, and with steel-blue feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on it placed a brazen tray which bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thirst-provoking onion, honeycomb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sacred meal of wheat. Near these she set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A noble beaker which the ancient chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had brought from home, embossed with studs of gOld.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four were its handles, and each handle showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two golden turtles feeding, while below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two others formed the base. Another hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could scarce have raised that beaker from its place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Nestor lifted it with ease. The maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair as a goddess, mingled Pramnian wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grated o’er it, with a rasp of brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A goat’s-milk cheese, and, sprinkling the white flour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon it, bade them drink. With this they quenched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their parching thirst, and then amused the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pleasant talk. Patroclus to the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime, a godlike presence, came, and stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man, as he saw him, instantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose from his princely seat and seized his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And led him in and bade him sit; but he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refused the proffered courtesy, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay, ’tis no time to sit: persuade me not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nursling of Jove; for he is to be feared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prone to wrath, who sent me to inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wounded man is with thee; but I know⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now that I see Machaon sitting here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd of the people. I must haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to Achilles, bearing my report.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou knowest, ancient chief, how quick he is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take offence and blame the innocent.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Nestor, the Gerenian knight, rejoined:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why does Achilles pity thus the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greece when wounded? Little can he know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What sorrow reigns throughout the Grecian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, smitten in the close or distant fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our bravest lie disabled in their ships.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The valiant son of Tydeus⁠—Diomed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is wounded⁠—wounded Agamemnon lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the great wielder of the javelin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses. By an arrow in the thigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eurypylus is smitten, and I now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring home this warrior with an arrow-wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet doth Achilles, valiant as he is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Care nothing for the Greeks. Will he then wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till our swift galleys, moored upon the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After a vain defence shall feed the flames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lit by the enemy’s hand, and we be slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And perish, heaps on heaps? My strength is now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not that which dwelt in these once active limbs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would I were strong and vigorous as of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When strife arose between our men and those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Elis for our oxen driven away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, driving off their beeves in turn, I slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Elean chief, the brave Itymoneus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Hypirochus! For, as he sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To save his herd, a javelin from my arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote him the first among his band. He fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His rustic followers fled on every side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mighty was the spoil we took: of beeves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We drave off fifty herds, as many flocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sheep, of swine as many, and of goats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An equal number, and of yellow steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice fifty;⁠—these were mares, and by their sides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran many a colt. We drave them all within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neleian Pylos in the night. Well pleased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Neleus, that so large a booty fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me, who entered on the war so young.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When morning brake, the heralds’ cry was heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Summoning all the citizens to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom from fruitful El is debts were due; is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the princes of the Pyleans came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made division of the spoil. For much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Epeians owed us: we were yet but few</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Pylos, and had suffered grievously.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty Hercules in former years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had made us feel his wrath, and of our men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had slain the bravest: of the twelve who drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their birth from Neleus, I alone am left;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The others fell. The Epeians brazen-mailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw this, delighted, and insulted us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And did us wrong. When now the spoil was shared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man for himself reserved a herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of oxen, and a numerous flock of sheep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three hundred, with their shepherds⁠—for to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large debts were due in Elis. He had sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four horses once, of peerless speed, with cars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To win a tripod, the appointed prize.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Augeias, king of men, detained them there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sent the grieving charioteer away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father, angered at the monarch’s words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And acts, took large amends, and gave the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To share among the people, that no one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might leave the ground, defrauded of his right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this was justly done, and we performed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due sacrifices to the gods, throughout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city;⁠—when the third day came, and brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Epeians all at once, in all their strength⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both men on foot and prancing steeds. With these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came the Molions twain, well armed, though young</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet untrained to war. There is a town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Named Thryoëssa, on a lofty hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off beside Alpheius, on the edge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sandy Pylos. They beleaguered this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sought to overthrow it. As they crossed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plain, Minerva came, a messenger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By night from Mount Olympus, bidding us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put on our armor. Not unwillingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Pyleans mustered, but in eager haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For battle. Yet did Neleus not consent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should arm myself⁠—he hid my steeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For still he deemed me inexpert in war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet even then, although I fought on foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I won great honor even among the knights;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so had Pallas favored me. A stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Named Minyeius pours into the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near to Arena, where the Pylean knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waited the coming of the holy morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While those who fought on foot came thronging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence, with our host complete, and all in arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We marched, and reached at noon the sacred stream at</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alpheius, where to Jove Omnipotent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We offered chosen victims, and a bull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the river-god, another to the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ocean, and a heifer yet unbroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To blue-eyed Pallas. Then we banqueted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bands, throughout the army, and lay down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In armor by the river-side to sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime the brave Epeians stood around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city, resolute to lay it waste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But first was to be done a mighty work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of war; for as the glorious sun appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the earth we dashed against the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praying to Jove and Pallas. When the fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the Eleans and the Pylean host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was just begun, I slew a youthful chief⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mulius⁠—and bore away his firm-paced steeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-haired Agamedé, eldest-born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of King Augeias’ daughters, was his spouse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well to her each healing herb was known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That springs from the great earth. As he drew near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I smote him with my brazen lance: he fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To earth: I sprang into his car, and stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the foremost warriors; while, around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave Epeians, as they saw him fall⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leader of their knights, their mightiest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle⁠—turned and, panic-stricken, fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each his own way. I followed on their flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a black tempest; fifty cars I took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from each car I dashed two warriors down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierced by my spear. And now I should have slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The young Molions also, Actor’s sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not their father, he who shakes the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enshrouded them in mist, and hidden them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all pursuit. Then with victorious might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Jove endue our arms, while we pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foe across a region strewn with shields⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slaying, and gathering spoil⁠—until our steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to Buprasium, rich in fields of wheat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the Olenian rock, and to the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alesium in Coloné. Pallas there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stayed our pursuit, and bade our host return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There slew I the last man, and left him there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the Achaians, guiding their swift steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homeward to Pylos from Euprasium, gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great thanks to Jupiter among the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Nestor among men. Such was I then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the heroes; but Achilles keeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His valor for himself alone⁠—and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bitterly must he grieve when he beholds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our people perish. O my friend! how well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Menoetius charged thee when he sent thee forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Phthia, to Atrides! We were both⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobly born Ulysses and myself⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the palace, and we clearly heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What he commanded thee. For we had come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Peleus’ stately dwelling, on our way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathering a host in fertile Greece, and saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great Menoetius there, and there we found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles with thee. There the aged knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peleus was burning, in the palace-court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A steer’s fat thighs to Jove the Thunderer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifted up a golden cup and poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark wine upon the blazing sacrifice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both of you were busy with the flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we were at the threshold. As he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our coming, in surprise Achilles sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward us, and took our hands and led us in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade us be seated, and before us placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The generous banquet due to stranger-guests.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, having feasted, I began discourse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exhorting you to join us. Both of you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once consented, and your fathers gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their admonitions. Aged Peleus charged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His son Achilles to excel the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In valor, while Menoetius, in his turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Actor, gave thee this command:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘My son, Achilles is the nobler born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou art elder. He surpasses thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By far in warlike might, but thou must prompt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mind with prudent counsels; thou must warn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And guide him; he will hearken to thy words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meant for his good.’ The old man charged thee thus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast forgotten it. Yet speak thou now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Peleus’ warlike son; and haply he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May heed thy counsels. Thou perchance mayst bend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His will⁠—who knows?⁠—by thy persuasive words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For wholesome are the warnings of a friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, if he shrink from some predicted doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if his goddess-mother have revealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aught of Jove’s counsels to him, then, at least</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him send thee to war, and let his troop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Myrmidons go with thee, so that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mayst carry succor to the Greeks. Yet more⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him permit thee in the field to wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His glorious armor, that the Trojan host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beholding thee so like to him, may shun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The combat, and the warlike sons of Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard-pressed, may breathe again, and find at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A respite from the conflict. Ye, who still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are fresh and vigorous, shall assault and drive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Townward the weary foe from camp and fleet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. The spirit of the youth took fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And instantly he hastened toward the ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus’ son. But when he came where lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The galleys of Ulysses the divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where was the assembly-place and judgment-seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where the altars of the immortals stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evaemon’s noble son, Eurypylus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met him as from the battle-field he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halting, and with an arrow in his thigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweat ran down his shoulders and his brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the black blood was oozing from his wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet was his spirit untamed. The gallant youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Menoetius, saw with grief, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Unhappy chiefs and princes of the Greeks!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are ye then doomed to feast with your fair limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The famished dogs of Ilium, far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From friends and country? Tell me, child of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gallant Eurypylus, will yet the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withstand the mighty Hector, or give way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And perish, overtaken by his spear?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the wise Eurypylus replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nursling of Jove, Patroclus! for the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no help, and all at their black ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must perish; for within them even now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All those who were our bravest warriors lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wounded in close encounter, or from far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Trojan hands, whose strength with every hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Becomes more terrible. Give now thine aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take me to my ship, and cut away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arrow from my thigh, and from the part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleanse with warm water the dark blood, and shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soothing and healing balms upon the wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As taught thee by Achilles, who had learned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The art from Chiron, righteous in his day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all other Centaurs. Now the leech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Machaon lies, I think, among the tents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wounded, and needs the aid of others’ skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Podalirius out upon the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helps stem the onset of the Trojan host.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the valiant Menoetiades:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O brave Eurypylus! what yet will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The end of this, and what are we to do?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even now I bear a message on my way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From reverend Nestor, guardian of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the great warrior, Peleus’ son; and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must not leave thee in thine hour of need.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and, lifting in his arms the prince,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bore him to his tent. A servant spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his entering, hides to form a couch;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there Patroclus laid him down and cut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rankling arrow from his thigh, and shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm water on the wound to cleanse away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purple blood, and last applied a root</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bitter flavor to assuage the smart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bruising it first within his palms: the pangs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ceased; the wound dried; the blood no longer flowed.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
