<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 23: The Funeral of Patroclus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Funeral of Patroclus</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Preparations for the funeral of Patroclus hastened by his appearance to Achilles in a dream⁠—Wood brought from the forest for the funeral pile⁠—A funeral procession, with offerings of hair shorn from the heads of the chiefs and laid on the dead⁠—Sacrifice offered, and the twelve Trojan youths slain, and the pile kindled⁠—The funeral games, at which Achilles presides.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-23" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>So mourned they in the city; but the Greeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they had reached the fleet and Hellespont,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dispersed, repairing each one to his ship,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that Achilles suffered not his band</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Myrmidons to part in disarray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus the chief enjoined his warrior friends:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Myrmidons, gallant knights, my cherished friends!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us not yet unyoke our firm-paced steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bring them with the chariots, and bewail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patroclus with the honors due the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when we have indulged in grief, release</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our steeds and take our evening banquet here.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and led by him the host broke forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In lamentation. Thrice around the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weeping, they drave their steeds with stately manes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Thetis in their hearts awoke the sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hopeless loss; their tears bedewed the sands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dropped upon their arms, so brave was he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whom they sorrowed. Peleus’ son began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mourning; on the breast of his dead friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He placed his homicidal hands, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Hail thou, Patroclus, even amid the shades!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For now shall I perform what once I vowed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, dragging Hector hither, I will give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His corse to dogs, and they shall rend his flesh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at thy funeral pile there shall be slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve noble Trojan youths, to avenge thy death.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake he, meditating outrages</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To noble Hector’s corse, which he had flung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the bier of Menoetiades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the dust. The Myrmidons unbraced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their shining brazen armor, and unyoked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their neighing steeds, and sat in thick array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the ship of swift Aeacides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While he set forth a sumptuous funeral feast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many a white ox, that day, beneath the axe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell to the earth, and many bleating goats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sheep were slain, and many fattened swine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White-toothed, were stretched to roast before the flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Vulcan, and around the corse the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Floated with blood. Meantime the Grecian chiefs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To noble Agamemnon’s royal tent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Led the swift son of Peleus, though he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwillingly, such anger for the death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his companion burned within his heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as they had reached his tent, the king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bade the clear-throated heralds o’er the fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Place a huge tripod, that Pelides there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might wash away the bloody stains he bore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet would he not, and with an oath replied:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“No! by the greatest and the best of gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Jupiter, I may not plunge my head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the bath before I lay my friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patroclus on the fire, and heap his mound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And till my hair is shorn; for never more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In life will be so great a sorrow mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now attend we to this mournful feast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the morn, O king of men, command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wood be brought, and all things duly done</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which may beseem a warrior who goes down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the lower darkness. Let the flamec</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seize fiercely and consume him from our sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leave the people to the tasks of war.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake; they hearkened and obeyed, and all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prepared with diligent hands the meal, and each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat down and took his portion of the feast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when their thirst and hunger were allayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most to their tents betook them and to rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Peleus’ son, lamenting bitterly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay down among his Myrmidons, beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The murmuring ocean, in the open space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where plashed the billows on the beach. And there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When slumber, bringing respite from his cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came softly and enfolded him⁠—for much</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His shapely limbs were wearied with the chase is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hector round the windy Ilium’s walls⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul of his poor friend Patroclus came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like him in all things⁠—stature, beautiful eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And voice, and garments which he wore in life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside his head the vision stood and spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Achilles, sleepest thou, forgetting me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never of me unmindful in my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou dost neglect me dead. O, bury me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quickly, and give me entrance through the gates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hades; for the souls, the forms of those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who live no more, repulse me, suffering not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I should join their company beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The river, and I now must wander round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spacious portals of the House of Death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me thy hand, I pray; for never more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I return to earth when once the fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall have consumed me. Never shall we take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Counsel together, living, as we sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apart from our companions; the hard fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appointed me at birth hath drawn me down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou too, O godlike man, wilt fall beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ramparts of the noble sons of Troy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet this I ask, and if thou wilt obey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This I command thee⁠—not to let my bones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be laid apart from thine. As we were reared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under thy roof together, from the time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When first Menoetius brought thee, yet a boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Opus, where I caused a sorrowful death;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by my hand, when wrangling at the dice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another boy, son of Amphidamas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was slain without design⁠—and Peleus made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His halls my home, and reared me tenderly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made me thy companion;⁠—so at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May one receptacle, the golden vase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Given by thy gracious mother, hold our bones.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The swift Achilles answered: “O most loved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And honored, wherefore art thou come, and why</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost thou command me thus? I shall fulfil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obediently thy wish; yet draw thou near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let us give at least a brief embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so indulge our grief.” He said, and stretched</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His longing arms to clasp the shade. In vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away like smoke it went, with gibbering cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down to the earth. Achilles sprang upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Astonished, clapped his hands, and sadly said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Surely there dwell within the realm below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both soul and form, though bodiless. All night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath stood the spirit of my hapless friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patroclus near me, sad and sorrowful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asking many duties at my hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A marvellous semblance of the living man.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and moved the hearts of all to grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lamentation. Rosy-fingered Morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dawned on them as around the hapless dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stood and wept. Then Agamemnon sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In haste from all the tents the mules and men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gather wood, and summoned to the task</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meriones, himself a gallant chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attendant on the brave Idomeneus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These went with woodmen’s axes and with ropes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well twisted, and before them went the mules.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er steep, o’er glen, by straight, by winding ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They journeyed till they reached the woodland wilds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ida fresh with springs, and quickly felled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the keen steel the towering oaks that came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crashing to earth. Then, splitting the great trunk.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They bound them on the mules, that beat the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hasty footsteps through the tangled wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impatient for the plain. Each woodcutter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouldered a tree, for so Meriones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Companion of the brave Idomeneus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commanded, and at last they laid them down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In order on the shore, where Peleus’ son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Planned that a mighty sepulchre should rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both for his friend Patroclus and himself.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So brought they to the spot vast heaps of wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sat them down, a numerous crowd. But then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles bade his valiant Myrmidons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put on their brazen mail and yoke their steeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once they rose, and put their harness on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they who fought from chariots climbed their seats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With those who reined the steeds. These led the van,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after them a cloud of men on foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thousands followed. In the midst was borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patroclus by his comrades. Cutting off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their hair, they strewed it, covering the dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind the corpse, Achilles in his hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sustained the head, and wept, for on that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gave to Hades his most cherished friend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now when they reached the spot which Pelcus’ son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had chosen, they laid down the dead, and piled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wood-around him, while the swift of foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great Achilles, bent on other thoughts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Standing apart, cut off his amber hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which for the river Sperchius he had long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nourished to ample growth, and, sighing, turned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes upon the dark-blue sea, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Sperchius, in vain my father made a vow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I, returning to my native shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should bring my hair, an offering to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slay a consecrated hecatomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And burn a sacrifice of fifty rams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the springs where in a sacred field</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy fragrant altar stands. Such was the vow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made by the aged man, yet hast thou not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fulfilled his wish. And now, since I no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall see my native land, the land I love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the slain hero bear these locks away.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and in his dear companion’s hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He placed the hair, and all around were moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To deeper grief; the setting sun had left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The host lamenting, had not Peleus’ son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Addressed Atrides, standing at his side:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Atrides, thou whose word the Greeks obey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most readily, all mourning has an end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dismiss the people from the pyre to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their evening meal, while we with whom it rests</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pay these mournful duties to the dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will close the rites; but let the chiefs remain.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This when the monarch Agamemnon heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instantly he dismissed to their good ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The people. They who had the dead in charge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remained, and heaped the wood, and built a pyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hundred feet each way from side to side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sorrowful hearts they raised and laid the corse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the summit. Then they flayed and dressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before it many fatlings of the flock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oxen with curved feet and crooked horns.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From these magnanimous Achilles took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fat, and covered with it carefully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dead from head to foot. Beside the bier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leaning toward it, jars of honey and oil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He placed, and flung, with many a deep-drawn sigh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve high-necked steeds upon the pile. Nine hounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There were, which from the table of the prince</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were daily fed; of these Achilles struck</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heads from two, and laid them on the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after these, and last, twelve gallant sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the brave Trojans, butchered by the sword;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he was bent on evil. To the pile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He put the iron violence of fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, wailing, called by name the friend he loved:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Rejoice, Patrochis, even in the land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of souls. Lo! I perform the vow I made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve gallant sons of the brave men of Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fire consumes with thee. For Hector’s corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flames shall not devour it, but the dogs.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such was his threat; but Hector was not made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prey of dogs, for Venus, born to Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drave off by night and day the ravenous tribe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a rosy and ambrosial oil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anointed him, that he might not be torn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When dragged along the earth. Above the spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all around it, where the body lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phoebus Apollo drew a veil of clouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reaching from heaven, that on his limbs the flesh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sinews might not stiffen in the sun.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The flame seized not upon the funeral pile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the dead chief. Pelides, swift of foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bethought him of another rite. He stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apart, and offered vows to the two winds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boreas and Zephyr. Promising to bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair offerings to their shrines, and pouring out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Libations from a golden cup, he prayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they would haste and wrap the pile in flames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And burn the dead to ashes. At his prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fleet Iris on a message to the Winds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took instant wing. They sat within the halls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of murmuring Zephyr, at a solemn feast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There Iris lighted on the threshold-stone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as they beheld her, each arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade her sit beside him. She refused</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seat her at the banquet, and replied:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Not now; for I again must take my way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the ocean currents to the land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where dwell the Aethiopians, who adore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gods with hecatombs, to take my share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sacrifice. Achilles supplicates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With promise of munificent offerings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boreas and sounding Zephyrus to come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blow the funeral structure into flames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which, bewailed by all the Grecian host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patroclus lies, and waits to be consumed.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake she, and departed. Suddenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arose the Winds with tumult, driving on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clouds before them. Soon they reached die deep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the violence of their sounding breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The billows heaved. They swept the fertile fields</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Troas, and descended on the pyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mightily it blazed with fearful roar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All night they howled and tossed the flames. All night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood swift Achilles, holding in his hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A double beaker; from a golden jar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He dipped the wine, and poured it forth, and steeped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth around, and called upon the soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his unhappy friend. As one laments</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A newly married son upon whose corse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flames are feeding, and whose death has made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His parents wretched, so did Peleus’ son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burning the body of his comrade, mourn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As round the pyre he moved with frequent sighs.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when the star that ushers in the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appeared, and after it the morning, clad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In saffron robes, had overspread the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pyre sank wasted, and the flames arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No longer, and the Winds, departing, flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Homeward across the Thracian sea, which tossed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And roared with swollen billows as they went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now Pelides from the pyre apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weary lay down, and gentle slumber soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came stealing over him. Meantime the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gathered round Agamemnon, and the stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bustle of their coming woke the chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sat upright and thus addressed his friends:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Atrides, and all ye who lead the hosts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Greece! our task is, first to quench the pyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dark red wine where’er the flames have spread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And next to gather, with discerning care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bones of Menoetiades. And these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May well be known; for in the middle space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lay, and round about him, and apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the border, were the rest consumed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bodies of the captives and the steeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be his enclosed within a golden vase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wrapped around with caul, a double fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I too pass into the realm of Death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be a tomb not over-spacious reared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of becoming size, which afterward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye whom we leave behind in our good ships,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we are gone, will build more broad and high.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake the swift Pelides, and the chiefs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Complied; and first they quenched with dark red wine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pyre, where’er the flames had spread, and where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay the deep ashes; then, with many tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gathered the white bones of their gentle friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And laid them in a golden vase, wrapped round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With caul, a double fold. Within the tents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They placed them softly, wrapped in delicate lawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then drew a circle for the sepulchre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, laying its foundations to enclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pyre, they heaped the earth, and, having reared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mound, withdrew. Achilles yet detained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The multitude, and made them all sit down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vast assembly. From the ships he brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prizes⁠—caldrons, tripods, steeds, and mules,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oxen in sturdy pairs, and graceful maids,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shining steel. Then for the swiftest steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A princely prize he offered first⁠—a maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of peerless form, and skilled in household arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a two-handled tripod of a size</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For two-and-twenty measures. He gave out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The second prize⁠—a mare unbroken yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of six years old, and pregnant with a mule.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the third winner in the race he staked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A caldron that had never felt the fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holding four measures, beautiful, and yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Untarnished. For the fourth, he offered gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two talents. For the fifth, and last, remained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A double vessel never touched by fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rose and stood, and thus addressed the Greeks:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Atrides, and ye other well-armed Greeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These prizes lie within the chariot-course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wait the charioteers. Were but these games</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In honor of another, then would I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contend, and win and carry to my tent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first among these prizes. For my steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye know, surpass the rest in speed, since they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are of immortal birth, by Neptune given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Peleus, and by him in turn bestowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On me his son. But I and they will keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aloof; they miss their skilful charioteer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who washed in limpid water from the fount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their manes, and moistened them with softening oil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now they mourn their friend, and sadly stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With drooping heads and manes that touch the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let such of you as trust in their swift steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their strong cars prepare to join the games.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Pelides spake: the abler charioteers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arose, and, first of all, the king of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eumelus, eminent in horsemanship,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dear son of Admetus. Then arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The valiant son of Tydeus, Diomed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And led beneath the yoke the Trojan steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Won from ^Eneas when Apollo saved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That chief from death. The son of Atreus next,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The noble Menelaus, yellow-haired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought two swift coursers underneath the yoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>King Agamemnon’s Aethè, and with her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His own Podargus. Kchepolus once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anchises’ son, sent Aethè as a gift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Agamemnon, that he might be free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From following with the army to the heights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ilium, and enjoy the ease he loved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Jove had given him wealth, and he abode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Sicyon’s plains. Now, eager for the race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took the yoke. Antilochus, the fourth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gallant son of the magnanimous king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neleian Nestor, harnessed next his steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With stately manes. Swift coursers that were foaled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Pylus drew his chariot. To his side as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His father came and stood, and spake and gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wise counsels, though the youth himself was wise:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Antilochus, I cannot doubt that Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Neptune both have loved thee, teaching thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young as thou art, all feats of horsemanship.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Small is the need to instruct thee. Thou dost know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well how to turn the goal, and yet thy steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are slow, and ill for thee may be the event.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their steeds are swift, yet have they never learned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To govern them with greater skill than thou.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now then, dear son, bethink thee heedfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all precautions, lest thou miss the prize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By skill the woodman, rather than by strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brings down the oak; by skill the pilot guides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wind-tossed galley over the dark sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus by skill the charioteer o’ercomes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His rival. He who trusts too much his steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chariot lets them veer from side to side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the course, nor keeps a steady rein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straight on, while one expert in horsemanship,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though drawn by slower horses, carefully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Observes the goal, and closely passes it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor fails to know how soon to turn his course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drawing the leathern reins, and steadily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keeps on, and watches him who goes before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now must I show the goal which, easily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discerned, will not escape thine eye. It stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An ell above the ground, a sapless post,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of oak or larch⁠—a wood of slow decay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By rain, and at its foot on either side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies a white stone; there narrow is the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But level is the race-course all around.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monument it is of one long dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or haply it has been in former days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A goal, as the swift-footed Peleus’ son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has now appointed it. Approach it near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Driving thy chariot close upon its foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then in thy seat lean gently to the left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cheer the right-hand horse, and ply the lash,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And give him a loose rein, yet firmly keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The left-hand courser close beside the goal⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So close that the wheel’s nave may seem to touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The summit of the post; yet strike thou not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stone beside it, lest thou lame thy steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And break the chariot, to thy own disgrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And laughter of the others. My dear son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be on thy guard; for if thou pass the goal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the rest, no man in the pursuit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can overtake or pass thee, though he drave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The noble courser of Adrastus, named</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arion the swift-footed, which a god</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bade spring to life, or those of matchless speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reared here in Ilium by Laomedon.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Neleian Nestor spake, and, having thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Given all the needful cautions, took his seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his own place. Meriones, the fifth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harnessed his steeds with stately manes, and all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mounted their chariots. Lots were cast; the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Peleus shook the helmet, and the lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Nestor’s son, Antilochus, leaped forth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And next the lot of King Eumelus came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Menelaus, mighty with the spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had the third lot; Meriones was next;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the bravest of them all, the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Tydeus, fell the final lot and place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stood in order, while Achilles showed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goal far off upon the level plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And near it, as the umpire of the race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He placed the godlike Phoenix, who had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His father’s armor-bearer, to observe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With judging eye, and bring a true report.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All raised at once the lash above their steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And smote them with the reins, and cheered them on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With vehement cries. Across the plain they swept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the fleet; beneath them rose the dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cloud, a tempest, and their tossing manes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were lifted by the wind. And now the cars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touched earth, and now were flung into the air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Erect the drivers stood, with beating hearts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eager for victory, each encouraging</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His steeds, that flew beneath the shroud of dust.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when they turned their course, and swiftly ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to the hoary deep to close the’ course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well did the skill of every chief appear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They put their horses to the utmost speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then did the quick-footed steeds that drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eumelus bear him on beyond the rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with his Trojan coursers Diomed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came next, so near it seemed that they would mount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The car before them, and upon the back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ample shoulders of Eumelus smote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their steaming breath; for as they ran their heads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaned over him. And then would Diomed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have passed him by, or would at least have made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The victory doubtful, had not Phoebus struck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his displeasure, from the hero’s hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shining scourge. It fell, and to his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Started indignant tears; for now he saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The others gaining on him, while the speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his own steeds, which feared the lash no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was slackened. Yet Apollo’s stratagem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was not unseen by Pallas, who o’ertook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shepherd of the people, and restored</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scourge he dropped, and put into his steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New spirit. In her anger she approached</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eumelus, snapped his yoke, and caused his mares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To start asunder from the track; the pole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was dashed into the ground, and from the seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chief was flung beside the wheel, his mouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Elbows, and nostrils torn, his forehead bruised.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grief filled his eyes with tears and choked his voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Diomed drave by his firm-paced steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outstripping all the rest; for Pallas nerved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their limbs with vigor, and bestowed on him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abundant glory. After him the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Atreus, fair-haired Menelaus, came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Nestor’s son cheered on his father’s steeds:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“On, on! press onward with your utmost speed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that I bid you strive against the steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of warlike Diomed, for Pallas gives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swiftness to them and glory to the man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who holds the reins; but let us overtake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The horses of Atrides, nor submit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be thus distanced, lest the victory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the mare Aethè cover you with shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fleet as ye are, why linger? This at least</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I tell you, and my words will be fulfilled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look not for kindly care at Nestor’s hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shepherd of the people, but for death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the sharp steel, if through your fault we take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A meaner prize. Then onward and away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all your strength, for this is my design⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pass by Menelaus where the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is narrow, and he cannot thwart my plan.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and they who feared their master’s threat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mended their speed awhile. The warlike son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Nestor saw just then the narrow pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the hollow way, a furrow ploughed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By winter floods, which there had torn the course</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deepened it. Atrides, to avoid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clash of wheels, drave thither; thither too</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Antilochus⁠—who turned his firm-paced steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little from the track in which they ran⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Followed him close. Atrides saw with fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shouted to Antilochus aloud:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Antilochus, thou drivest rashly; rein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy horses in. The way is narrow here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon will broaden, and thou then canst pass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware lest with thy chariot-wheels thou dash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against my own, and harm befall us both.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake; but all the more Antilochus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Urged on his coursers with the lash, as if</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had not heard. As far as flies a quoit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrown from the shoulder of a vigorous youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who tries his strength, so far they ran abreast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The horses of Atrides then fell back;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He slacked the reins; for much he feared the steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would dash against each other in the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And overturn the sumptuous cars, and fling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The charioteers contending for the prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the dusty track. With angry words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair-haired Menelaus chided thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Antilochus, there is no man so prone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou to mischief, and we greatly err,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We Greeks, who call thee wise. Go now, and yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt not take the prize without an oath.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Again he spake, encouraging his steeds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Check not your speed, nor sorrowfully stand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their feet and knees will fail with weariness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before your own; they are no longer young.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake; the coursers, honoring his voice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran with fresh speed, and soon were near to those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Nestor’s son. Meantime the assembled Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat looking where the horses scoured the plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And filled the air with dust. Idomeneus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lord of Crete, descried the coursers first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For on a height he sat above the crowd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heard the chief encouraging his steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knew him, and he marked before the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A courser, chestnut-colored save a spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the middle of the forehead, white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And round as the full moon. And then he stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upright, and from his place harangued the Greeks:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O friends, the chiefs and leaders of the Greeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am I the sole one that descries the steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or do ye also? Those who lead the race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think, are not the same, and with them comes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A different charioteer. The mares, which late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were foremost, may have somewhere come to harm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw them first to turn the goal, and now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can no more discern them, though my sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweeps the whole Trojan plain from side to side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Either the charioteer has dropped the reins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And could not duly round the goal, or else</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Met with disaster at the turn, o’erthrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His chariot broken, and the affrighted mares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darting, unmastered, madly from the way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rise: look forth yourselves. I cannot well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discern, but think the charioteer is one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, born of an Aetolian stock, commands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Argives⁠—valiant Diomed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A son of Tydeus, tamer of wild steeds.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Ajax, swift of foot, Oileus’ son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answered with bitter words: “Idomeneus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why this perpetual prating? Far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mares with rapid hoofs are traversing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The plain, and thou art not the youngest here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Argives, nor hast such sharp eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath thy brows, yet must thou chatter still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among thy betters here it ill becomes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man like thee to be so free of tongue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coursers of Eumelus, which at first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outran the rest, are yet before them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he is drawing near and holds the reins.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Cretan leader angrily rejoined:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ajax, thou railer, first in brawls, yet known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in all else below the other Greeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man of brutal mood, come, let us stake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tripod or a caldron, and appoint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As umpire Agamemnon, to decide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which horses are the foremost in the race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when thou losest thou mayst be convinced.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake: Oilean Ajax, swift of foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Started in anger from his seat, to cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reproaches back, and long and fierce had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The quarrel if Achilles had not risen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said: “No longer let this strife go on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Idomeneus and Ajax! Ill such words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Become you; ye would blame in other men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What now ye do. Sit then among the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And watch the race; for soon the charioteers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contending for the victory will be here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each of you⁠—for well ye know the steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Greek chieftains⁠—for himself will see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose hold the second place, and whose are first.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake: Tydides rapidly drew near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lashing the shoulders of his steeds, and they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seemed in the air as, to complete the course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They flew along, and flung the dust they trod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back on the charioteer. All bright with tin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gold, the car rolled after them; its tires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made but a slender trace in the light dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So rapidly they ran. And now he stopped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the circle, while his steeds were steeped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sweat, that fell in drops from neck and breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then from his shining seat he leaped, and laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His scourge against the yoke. Brave Sthenelus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came forward, and at once received the prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Diomed, and bade his comrades lead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The maid away, and in their arms bear off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tripod, while himself unyoked the steeds.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next the Neleian chief, Antilochus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came with his coursers. More by fraud than speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He distanced Menelaus, yet that chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drave his fleet horses near him. Just so far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As runs the wheel behind a steed that draws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His master swiftly o’er the plain, his tail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touching the tire with its long hairs, and small</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The space between them as the spacious plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is traversed, Menelaus just so far as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was distanced by renowned Antilochus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though at first he fell as far behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a quoit’s cast, yet was he gaining ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rapidly, now that Agamemnon’s mare,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Aethè the stately maned, increased her speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Menelaus, had the race for both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Been longer, would have passed his rival by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor left the victory doubtful. After him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A spear’s throw distant, came Meriones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gallant comrade of Idomeneus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose full-maned steeds were slower than the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he unskilled in contests such as these.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And last of all Eumelus came. He drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His showy chariot after him, and drave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His steeds before him. Great Achilles saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pity, and from where he stood among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Greeks aduressed him thus with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The ablest horseman brings his steeds the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let us, as is just, confer on him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The second prize; Tydides takes the first.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and all approved his words; and now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mare, to please the Greeks, had been bestowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon Eumelus, if Antilochus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Son of magnanimous Nestor, had not risen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To plead for justice with Achilles thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Achilles, I shall deem it grave offence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou fulfil thy word; for thou wilt take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My prize, because thou seest that this man’s car</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his fleet steeds have suffered injury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he be skilful. Yet he should have prayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the good gods; then had he not been seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bringing his steeds the last. But if thou feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compassion for him, and if so thou please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Large store of brass and gold is in thy tent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thine are cattle, and handmaidens thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And firm-paced steeds; hereafter give of these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nobler largess, or bestow it now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hear the Greeks applaud thee. But this prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I yield not; let the warrior who may claim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take it try with me his strength of arm.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He ceased: the noble son of Peleus smiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, pleased to see Antilochus succeed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he was a beloved friend⁠—he spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These wingèd words: “Since, then, Antilochus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wilt that I bestow some recompense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon Eumelus from my store, I give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brazen corselet which my arm in war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took from Asteropaaus, edged around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shining tin⁠—a gift of no mean price.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He ceased, and sent his friend Automedon at</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bring it from the tent. He went and brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The corselet, and Eumelus joyfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Received it from Achilles. Then arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among them Menelaus, ill at ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And angry with Antiiochus. He took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sceptre from a herald’s hand, who hushed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crowd to silence, and the hero spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Antilochus, who wert till now discreet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What hast thou done? Thou hast disgraced my skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wronged my steeds by thrusting in thine own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which were less fleet, before them. Now, ye chiefs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leaders of the Achaians, judge between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This man and me, and judge impartially,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest that some warrior of the Greeks should say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Menelaus, having overcome</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Antilochus by falsehood, led away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mare a prize; for his were slower steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he the mightier man m feats of arms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, I myself will judge; and none of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Greeks will censure me, for what I do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will be but just. Antilochus, step forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Illustrious as thou art, and in due form,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Standing before thy horses and thy car,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And taking in thy hand the pliant scourge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which thou just now hast wielded, touch thy steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swear by Neptune, whose embrace surrounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth, that thou hast wittingly employed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No stratagem to break my chariot’s speed.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thus discreet Antilochus replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Have patience with me: I am younger far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than thou, King Menelaus; thou art both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My elder and my better. Thou dost know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faults to which the young are ever prone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The will is quick to act, the judgment weak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bear with me then. The mare which I received</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cheerfully make over to thy hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if thou wilt yet more of what I have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I give it willingly and instantly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather, O loved of Jove, than lose a place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thy good-will, and sin against the gods.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The son of large-souled Nestor, speaking thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Led forth the mare, and gave her to the hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Menelaus, o’er whose spirit came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gladness. As upon a field of wheat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bristling with ears gathers the freshening dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was his spirit gladdened in his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he bespake the youth with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Antilochus, now shall my anger cease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For hitherto thou hast not shown thyself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foolish or fickle, though the heat of youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just now hath led thee wrong. In time to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware to practise stealthy arts on men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of higher rank than thou. No other Greek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would easily have made his peace with me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou hast suffered much, and much hast done⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, and thy worthy father, and his son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy brother⁠—for my sake. I therefore yield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thy petition; yet I give to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mare, though mine she be, that these who stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around us may perceive that I am not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of unforgiving or unyielding mood.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and to Noëmon gave the mare⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Noëmon, comrade of Antilochus⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lead her thence, while for himself he took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shining caldron. Then Meriones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fourth in the race, received the prize of gold⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two talents. But the fifth prize and the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The double goblet, still was left unclaimed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this Achilles carried through the crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Greeks, and placed in Nestor’s hands, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Receive thou this, O ancient man, to keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In memory of the funeral honors paid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patroclus, whom thou never more shalt see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Greeks. I give this prize, which thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast not contended for, since thou wilt wield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more the cestus, nor wilt wrestle more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor hurl the javelin at the mark, nor join</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foot-race; age lies heavy on thy limbs.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and gave the prize, which Nestor took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well pleased, and thus with wingèd words replied:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Son, thou hast spoken rightly, for these limbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are strong no longer; neither feet nor hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Move on each side with vigor as of yore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would I were but as young, with strength as great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when the Epeians in Buprasium laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>King Amarynceus in the sepulchre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And funeral games were offered by his sons!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then of the Epeians there was none like me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor of the Pylian youths, nor yet among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brave Aetolians. In the boxing-match</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I took the prize from Clytomedes, son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Enops, and in wrestling overcame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ancaeus the Pleuronian, who rose up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against me. In the foot-race I outstripped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fleet as he was, Iphiclus, and beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phyleus and Polydore I threw the spear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only the sons of Actor won the race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against me with their chariot, and they won</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through force of numbers. Much they envied me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And feared lest I should bear away the prize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For largest in that contest of the steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was the reward, and they were two⁠—one held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steadily held, the reins, the other swung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lash. Such was I once. Now feats like these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Belong to other, younger men, and I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though eminent among the heroes once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must do as sad old age admonishes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go thou, and honor thy friend’s funeral</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With games. Thy gift I willingly accept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rejoicing that thy thoughts revert to one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who loves thee, and that thou forgettest not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pay the honor due to me among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Greeks. The gods will give thee thy reward.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He ceased. The son of Peleus, having heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This praise from Nestor, left him, and passed through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty concourse of the Greeks. He laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before them prizes for the difficult strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the boxers. To the middle space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He led a mule, and bound him, six years old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strong for toil, unbroken and most hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To break, while to the vanquished he assigned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A goblet. Rising, he addressed the host:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ye sons of Atreus and ye well-armed Greeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We call for two of the most skilled to strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For these, by striking with the lifted fist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he to whom Apollo shall decree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The victory, acknowledged by you all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall have this sturdy mule to lead away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vanquished takes this goblet as his meed.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake. A warrior strong and huge of limb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Skilled in the cestus, named Epeius, son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Panopeus, rose at the word, and laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hand upon the sturdy mule, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Let him appear whose lot will be to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goblet. No man of the Grecian host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will get the mule by overcoming me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In combat with the cestus⁠—so I deem.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that I claim to be the best man here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And should it not suffice that in the war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others surpass me? All cannot excel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In everything alike. I promise this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shall fulfil my word⁠—that I will crush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His body, and will break his bones. His friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should all remain upon the ground to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their comrade off when beaten by my hand.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and all were silent. Only rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Euryalus, whose father was the king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mecisteus of Talaion’s line, the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who went to Thebes and overcame, of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all the funeral games of CEdipus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sons of Cadmus. To Euryalus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came Diomed, the spearman, bidding him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expect the victory which he greatly wished</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His friend might gain. Around his waist he drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A girdle, adding straps that from the hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a wild bull were cut with dextrous care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, fully now arrayed, the twain stepped forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the middle space, and both began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The combat. Lifting their strong arms, they brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their heavy hands together. Fearfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was heard the crash of jaws; from every limb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sweat was streaming. As Euryalus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looked round, his noble adversary sprang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And smote him on the cheek⁠—too rude a blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be withstood; his shapely limbs gave way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath him. As upon the weedy shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the fresh north wind stirs the water’s face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fish leaps forth to light, and then again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dark wave covers it, so sprang and fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chief. Magnanimous Epeius gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hands and raised him up; his friends came round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And led him thence with dragging feet, and head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That drooped from side to side, while from his mouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came clotted blood. They placed him in the midst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unconscious still, and sent and took the cup.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, third in order, for the wrestling-match</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son of Peleus brought and showed the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet other prizes. To the conqueror</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tripod for the hearth, of ample size,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He offered; twice six oxen, as the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Esteemed it, were its price. And next he placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In view a damsel for the vanquished, trained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In household arts; four beeves were deemed her price.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then rose Achilles, and addressed the Greeks:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ye who would try your fortune in this strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arise.” He spake, and mighty Ajax rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son of Telamon, and after him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wise Ulysses, trained to stratagems.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They, girding up their loins, came forth and stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the mid space, and there with vigorous arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They clasped each other, locked like rafters framed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By some wise builder for the lofty roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a great mansion proof against the winds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then their backs creaked beneath the powerful strain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their strong hands; the sweat ran down their limbs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Large whelks upon their sides and shoulders rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crimson with blood. Still eagerly they strove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For victory and the tripod. Yet in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ulysses labored to supplant his foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And throw him to the ground, and equally</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did Ajax strive in vain, for with sheer strength</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ulysses foiled his efforts. When they saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the Greeks wearied of the spectacle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty Telamonian Ajax said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Son of Laertes, nobly born and trained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wise expedients, lift me up, or I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will lift up thee; and leave the rest to Jove.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and raised Ulysses from the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dealt, with ready stratagem, a blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the ham of Ajax, and the limb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave way; the hero fell upon his back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on his breast Ulysses, while the host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood wondering and amazed. Ulysses strove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In turn, to lift his rival, but prevailed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only to move him from his place; he caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The knee of Ajax in his own, and both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came to the ground together, soiled with dust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They rose to wrestle still, but from his seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles started, and forbade them thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Contend no longer, nor exhaust your strength</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With struggling; there is victory for both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And equal prizes. Now depart, and leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The field of contest to the other Greeks.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake: they listened and obeyed, and wiped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dust away, and put their garments on.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the son of Peleus placed in sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prizes of swiftness⁠—a wrought silver cup</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That held six measures, and in beauty far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excelled all others known; the cunning hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Sidonian artisans had given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its graceful shape, and over the dark sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men of Phoenicia brought it, with their wares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the Greek harbors; they bestowed it there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Thoas. Afterward Euneiis, son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Jason, gave it to the hero-chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patroclus, to redeem a captive friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycaon, Priam’s son. Achilles now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought it before the assembly as a prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which, in honor of the friend he loved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The swiftest runners of the host should strive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next, for the second in the race, he showed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A noble fatling ox; and for the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gold, half a talent. Then he stood and said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the Achaians: “Those who would contend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For these rewards, rise up.” And then arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oilean Ajax, fleet of foot; and next</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ulysses the sagacious; last upstood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Antilochus, the son of Nestor, known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As swiftest of the youths. In due array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stood; Achilles showed the goal. At once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forward they sprang. Oilean Ajax soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gained on the rest, but close behind him ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great Ulysses. As a shapely maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flinging the shuttle draws with careful hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thread that fills the warp, and so brings near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shuttle to her bosom, just so near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Ajax ran Ulysses, in the prints</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made by his rival’s feet, before the dust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell back upon them. As he ran, his breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smote on the head of Ajax. All the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouted applause to him, encouraging</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ardor for the victory; but when now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They neared the goal, Ulysses silently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prayed thus to Pallas: “Goddess, hear my prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And help these feet to win.” The goddess heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lightened all his limbs, his feet, his hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And just as they were rushing on the prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ajax, in running, slipped and fell⁠—the work</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Pallas⁠—where in heaps the refuse lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From entrails of the bellowing oxen slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In honor of Patroclus by the hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of swift Achilles. Mouth and nostrils both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were choked with filth. The much-enduring man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ulysses, coming first, received the cup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Ajax took the ox, and as he stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holding the animal’s horn and spitting forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dirt, he said to those around: “T is plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goddess caused my feet to slide; she aids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ulysses like a mother.” So he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Greeks laughed. And then Antilochus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Received the third reward, and with a smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said to the Greeks: “I tell you all, my friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What you must know already, that the gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honor the aged ever. Ajax stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somewhat in years above me, but this chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who takes the prize is of a former age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And earlier race of men; they call him old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hard it were for any Greek to vie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him in swiftness, save Achilles here.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such praise he gave Pelides, fleet of foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who answered: “Thy good word, Antilochus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall not be vainly spoken. I will add</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet half a talent to thy gold.” He said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave the gold; Antilochus, well pleased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Received it. Then Pelides brought a spear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ponderous length into the middle space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And laid it down, and placed a buckler near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And helmet, which hail been Sarpedon’s arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And which Patroclus won of him in war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then stood Achilles and addressed the Greeks:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I call on two, the bravest of the host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To arm themselves and take their spears in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a contest for these weapons put</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each other to the proof. Whoever first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall wound his adversary, piercing through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The armor to the delicate skin beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And draw the crimson blood, to him I give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This beautiful sword of Thrace, with silver studs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Won from Asteropaeus. And let both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bear off these arms, a common gift, and both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall sit and banquet nobly in my tent.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and Telamonian Ajax rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The large of limb; Tydides Diomed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strong, rose also. When they had put on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their arms apart from all the host, they came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All eager for the combat, to the lists,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fearful was their aspect. All the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looked on with dread and wonder, and when now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood face to face the warriors, thrice they rushed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against each other; thrice they dealt their blows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Ajax thrust through Diomed’s round shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His weapon, but it wounded not; the mail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond it stopped the stroke. Tydides aimed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over his adversary’s mighty shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A blow to reach his neck. The Greeks, alarmed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Ajax, shouted that the strife should cease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both divide the prize. Achilles heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But gave to Diomed the ponderous sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its sheath, and the fair belt from which it hung.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Again Pelides placed before the host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mass of iron, shapeless from the forge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which once the strong Eëtion used to hurl;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But swift Achilles, when he took his life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought it with other booty in his ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Troas. Rising, he addressed the Greeks:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Stand forth, whoever will contend for this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if broad fields and rich be his, this mass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will last him many years. The man who tends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His flocks, or guides his plough, need not be sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To town for iron; he will have it here.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and warlike Polypoetes rose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uprose the strong Leonteus, who in form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was like a god. The son of Telamon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose also, and Epeius nobly born;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each took his place. Epeius seized the mass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sent it whirling. All the Achaians laughed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The loved of Mars, Leonteus, flung it next,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after him the son of Telamon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The large-limbed Ajax, from his vigorous arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sent it beyond the mark of both. But when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sturdy warrior Polypoetes took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mass in hand, as far as o’er his beeves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A herdsman sends his whirling staff, so far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This cast outdid the rest. A shout arose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The friends of sturdy Polypoetes took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prize, and bore it to the hollow ships.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Achilles for the archers brought forth steel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tempered for arrow-heads⁠—ten axes, each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With double edge, and single axes ten⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from a galley’s azure prow took off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mast, and reared it on the sands afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, tying to its summit by the foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A timorous dove, he bade them aim at her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Whoever strikes the bird shall bear away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The double axes to his tent; while he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hits the cord, but not the bird, shall take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The single axes, as the humbler prize.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He ceased, and then arose the stalwart king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Teucer; then also rose Meriones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The valiant comrade of Idomeneus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lots were shaken in a brazen helm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Teucer’s lot was first. He straightway sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shaft with all his strength, but made no vow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a choice hecatomb of firstling lambs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Phoebus, monarch-god. He missed the bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was the will of Phoebus, but he struck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close to her foot, the cord that made her fast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The keen shaft severed it; the dove flew up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the heavens; the fillet dropped to earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the loud applauses of the Greeks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then Meriones made haste to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bow from Teucer’s hand. Long time he held.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The arrow aimed, the while he made a vow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Phoebus, the great archer, promising</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A chosen hecatomb of firstling lambs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, looking toward the dove, as high in air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wheeled beneath the clouds, he pierced her breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the wing; the shaft went through and fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fixed in the ground, beside Meriones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the bird settled on the galley’s mast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With drooping head and open wings. The breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forsook her soon, and down from that high perch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fell to earth. The people all looked on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admiring and amazed. Meriones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took up the double axes as his prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Teucer bore the others to the fleet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And then Pelides brought into the midst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A ponderous spear, and laid a caldron down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which never felt the fire, inwrought with flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its price an ox. And then the spearmen rose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Atrides Agamemnon, mighty king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First rose, and after him Meriones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brave companion of Idomeneus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus to both the swift Achilles said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O son of Atreus, for we know how far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou dost excel all others, and dost cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spear with passing strength and skill, bear thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This prize, as victor, to the roomy ships,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if it please thee, let us, as I wish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give to our brave Meriones the spear.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and Agamemnon, king of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Complied, and gave Meriones in hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brazen spear, while to Talthybius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The herald, he consigned the greater prize.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
