<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 20: The Battle of the Gods</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-20" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Battle of the Gods</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Permission given by Jupiter to the gods to take part in the war⁠—The combat renewed with great violence and tumult⁠—Aeneas, encountering Achilles, to which he is encouraged by Apollo, is only preserved from death by the interposition of Neptune⁠—Slaughter of the Trojans by Achilles⁠—Hector, when in danger of being slain, snatched from the presence of Achilles by Phoebus in a cloud⁠—Havoc made by Achilles in the Trojan army.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Thus, O Pelides, did the sons of Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impatient for the battle, arm themselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By their beaked ships, around thee. Opposite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a height that rose amidst the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans waited. Meantime Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent Themis from the Olympian summit, ploughed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With dells, to summon all the immortal ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To council. Forth she went from place to place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bidding them to the palace halls of Jove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then none of all the Rivers failed to join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assembly, save Oceanus, and none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the Nymphs were absent whose abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in the pleasant groves and river-founts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grassy meadows. When they reached the halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cloud-compelling Jove they sat them down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On shining thrones, divided each from each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By polished columns, wrought for Father Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Vulcan’s skill. Thus all to Jove’s abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were gathered. Neptune had not disobeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The call. He left the sea, and took his seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among them, and inquired the will of Jove.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why, wielder of the lightning, dost thou call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods again to council? Do thy plans</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concern the Greeks and Trojans? For the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between their hosts will be rekindled soon.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the Cloud-compeller Jove replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou who dost shake the shores, thou knowest well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purpose of my mind, and for whose sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I call this council. Though so soon to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are my care. Yet will I keep my place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seated upon the Olympian mount, and look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calmly upon the conflict. All of you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Depart, and aid the Trojans or the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it may list you. For should Peleus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone do battle with the men of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their squadrons could not stand before the assault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the swift-footed warrior for an hour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beforetime, at the sight of him they fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ercome with fear, and now, when he is roused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rage by his companion’s death, I fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest, though it be against the will of fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He level with the ground the walls of Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Saturnius spake, and moved the hosts to join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In desperate conflict. All the gods went forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mingle with the war on different sides.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Juno and Pallas hastened to the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Neptune, he who makes the earth to shake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hermes, god of useful arts, and shrewd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In forecast. Vulcan also went with them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong and stern-eyed, yet lame, his feeble legs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moving with labor. To the Trojan side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went crested Mars, Apollo with his locks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unshorn, Diana mighty with the bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Latona, Xanthus, and the queen of smiles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Venus; for while the gods remained apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From men, the Achaian host was high in hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because Achilles, who so long had left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war, now reappeared upon the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And terror shook the limbs of every son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy when he beheld the swift of foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides, terrible as Mars⁠—that curse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of human-kind⁠—in glittering arms again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the dwellers of Olympus joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crowd of mortals, Discord, who makes mad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nations, rose and raged; Minerva raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her war-cry from the trench without the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then she shouted from the sounding shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, like a cloudy whirlwind, opposite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved Mars, and fiercely yelled, encouraging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men of Troy, as on the city heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood, or paced with rapid steps the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the Simoïs, called the Beautiful.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus, kindling hate between the hosts, the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Engaged, and hideous was the strife that rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among them. From above, with terrible crash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thundered the father of the blessed gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mortal men, while Neptune from below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook the great earth and lofty mountain peaks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then watery Ida’s heights and very roots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city of Troy, and the Greek galleys, quaked.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Pluto, ruler of the nether world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaped from his throne in terror, lest the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who makes the earth to tremble, cleaving it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above him, should lay bare to gods and men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His horrible abodes, the dismal haunts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which even the gods abhor. Such tumult filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The field of battle when the immortals joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The conflict. Then against King Neptune stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus Apollo, with his wingèd shafts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas, goddess of the azure eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confronted Mars. Encountering Juno came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sister of Apollo, archer-queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And huntress, Dian of the golden bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The helpful Hermes, god of useful arts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opposed Latona, and the mighty stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called Xanthus by the immortals, but by men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scamander, with his eddies strong and deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood face to face with Vulcan in the field.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So warred the gods with gods. Meantime the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus, ranging through the thick of fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought only Hector, Priam’s son, whose blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He meant to pour to greedy Mars, the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of carnage. But Apollo, who impels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warriors to battle, stirred Aeneas up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet Pelides. First he filled his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With resolute valor, and then took the voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam’s son, Lycaon. In his shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus spake Apollo, son of Jupiter:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Aeneas, prince of Troy, where now are all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boasts which thou hast made before the chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy at banquets, that thou yet wouldst meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides in the combat hand to hand?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Aeneas made reply: “Priamides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why dost thou bid me, when thou knowest me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwilling, meet in combat Peleus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty among men? It will not be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the first time if I confront him now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He chased me once from Ida with his spear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me and my fellows, when he took our herds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid Lyrnessus waste and Pedasus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Jove, who gave me strength and nimble feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Preserved me; I had else been slain by him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by Minerva, for the goddess went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him, giving him the victory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moving him to slay the Leleges</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Trojans with the brazen spear he bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis not for mortal man to fight the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus, at whose side there ever stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the immortal gods, averting harm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then his weapon flies right on, nor stops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until it bites the flesh. Yet were the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To weigh the victory in an equal scale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles would not vanquish me with ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he might boast his frame were all of brass.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the king Apollo, son of Jove:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pray, warrior, to the eternal gods. They say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Venus gave thee birth, who has her own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Jove. His mother is of lower rank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than thine. Thine is a child of Jove, but his</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A daughter of the Ancient of the Deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike at him with that conquering spear of thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor let him scare thee with stern words and threats.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He said, and breathed into the prince’s breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh valor, as, arrayed in glittering arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He pressed to where the foremost warriors fought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not unseen by Juno’s eye went forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of old Anchises. She convened</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods in council, and addressed them thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Neptune and Pallas, what shall now be done?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consider ye. Aeneas, all arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In glittering arms, is pressing on to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides. Phoebus sends him. Let us join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To turn him back, or let some one of us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand near Achilles, fill his limbs with strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor let his heart grow faint, but let him see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we, the mightiest of the immortals, look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On him with favor, and that those who strive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the war and bloodshed to protect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of Troy are empty boasters all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this we came from heaven to interpose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle, that Achilles may endure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No harm from Trojan hands, although, no doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter he must suffer all that Fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spun for him when his mother brought him forth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if he hear not, from some heavenly voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this assurance, fear may fall on him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, haply, in the battle he shall meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some god; for when revealed to human sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The presence of the gods is terrible.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then did Neptune, he who shakes the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make answer: “Juno, it becomes thee ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be so greatly vexed. I cannot wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A contest with the other gods, though we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In power excel them. Rather let us sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart, where we can look upon the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave it to mankind. And yet if Mars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Phoebus should begin the fight, or seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thwart Achilles or restrain his arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will be cause for us to join the strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In earnest, and I deem that they full soon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The contest ended, will return to join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assembled gods upon the Olympian mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forced to withdraw by our all-potent hands.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the dark-haired god, and led the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the high mound of godlike Hercules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised from the earth by Trojans, with the aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pallas, that the hero there might find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A refuge when the monster of the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should chase him from the sea-beach to the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With other gods beside him Neptune there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat down and drew a shadow, which no sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could pierce, around their shoulders. Other gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the hill called Beautiful, were grouped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round thee, Apollo, archer-god, and Mars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spoiler of cities. On both sides they sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devising plans, unwilling to begin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fierce encounter, though Almighty Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From where he sat in heaven commanded it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The warriors thronged into the field, which shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With brazen armor and caparisons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of steeds; earth trembled with the sounding tramp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of marching squadrons. From the opposing ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two chieftains, each the bravest of his host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impatient to engage⁠—Anchises’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas, and the great Achilles⁠—came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And first Aeneas, with defiant mien</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nodding casque, stood forth. He held his shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him, which he wielded right and left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shook his brazen spear. On the other side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides hurried toward him, terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As is a lion, which the assembled hinds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a whole village chase and seek to slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While on he stalks, contemning their assault;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if the arrow of some strong-armed youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have smitten him, he stands, and gathers all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His strength to spring, with open jaws and teeth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half hid in foam, and uttering fearful growls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his deep chest; he lashes with his tail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sides and sinewy thighs to rouse himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat, and then, grimly frowning, leaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay, or by the foremost youths be slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sprang Achilles, moved by his bold heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet the brave Aeneas. As the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew near each other, the swift-footed chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great Achilles, was the first to speak:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why, O Aeneas, hast thou come so far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through this vast crowd to seek me? Does thy heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid thee confront me in the hope to gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The place which Priam holds, and to bear rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the knights Of Troy? Yet shouldst thou take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My life, think not that Priam in thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will place such large reward. He has his sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor is he fickle, but of stable mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or will the Trojans, if thou slayest me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestow on thee broad acres, of a soil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fruitful exceedingly, and suited well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To vines or to the plough, which thou mayst till</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That also, as I hope, thou wilt obtain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With difficulty; for, unless I err,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I forced thee once to flee before my spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost thou remember, when thou wert alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among thy beeves, I drave thee, running fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down Ida’s steeps? Then didst thou never turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To face me, but didst seek a hiding-place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within Lyrnessus, which I also took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wasted, with the aid of Father Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas. From the town I led away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The women, never to be free again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove and the other gods protected thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That day. Yet will they not protect thee now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou dost vainly hope. Withstand me not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I counsel thee, but hide thyself among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crowd before thou suffer harm, for he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sees past evils only is a fool.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then Aeneas answered: “Do not think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides, with such words to frighten me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if I were a beardless boy. I too</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might use reproach and taunt; but well we know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other’s birth and lineage, through report</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men, although by sight I know not thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor know’st thou mine. They say that thou art sprung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Peleus the renowned, and from the nymph</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ocean, fair-haired Thetis, while I boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My birth from brave Anchises, and can claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Venus as mother. Two of these today</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must weep the death of a beloved son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we are not to part, I think, nor end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The combat after a few childish words;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet let me speak, that thou mayst better know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our lineage, known already far and wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove was the father, cloud-compelling Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Dardanus, by whom Dardania first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was peopled, ere our sacred Troy was built</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the great plain⁠—a populous town; for men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt still upon the roots of Ida fresh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many springs. To Dardanus was born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Erichthonius, richest in his day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mortal men, and in his meadows grazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three thousand mares, exulting in their brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of tender foals. Of some of this vast herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boreas became enamored as they fed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came to them in likeness of a steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wore an azure mane, and they brought forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve foals, which all were females, of such speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That when they frolicked on the teeming earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They flew along the topmost ears of wheat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And broke them not, and when they sported o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty bosom of the deep they ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the hoary summits of its waves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Erichthonius Tros was born, who ruled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans, and from Tros there sprang three sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of high renown⁠—Ilus, Assaracus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And godlike Ganymede, most beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men; the gods beheld and caught him up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To heaven, so beautiful was he, to pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wine to Jove, and ever dwell with them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ilus had a son, Laomedon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mighty fame, to whom five sons were born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tithonus, Priam, Lampus, Clytius,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hicetaon, trained to war by Mars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assaracus begat my ancestor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Capys, to whom Anchises owes his birth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anchises is my father; Priam’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is noble Hector. Such I claim to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My lineage and my blood; but Jove at will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives in large measure, or diminishes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men’s warlike prowess; and the power of Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is over all. But let us talk no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of things like these, as if we were but boys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While here in the mid-field we stand between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warring armies. Both of us might cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reproaches at each other, many and foul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as no galley of a hundred oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could bear and float. Men’s tongues are voluble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And endless are the modes of speech, and far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Extends from side to side the field of words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as thou utterest it will be thy lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear from others. But what profits it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For us to rail and wrangle, in high brawl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like women angered to the quick, that rush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the middle of the street and scold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With furious words, some true and others false,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As rage may prompt them? Me thou shalt not move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With words from my firm purpose ere thou raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy arm against me. Let us hasten first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To prove the temper of our brazen spears.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and hurled his brazen spear to smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dreadful shield, a terror in men’s eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That mighty buckler rang with the strong blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, as it came, held forth his shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With nervous arm far from him, for he feared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the long javelin of his valiant foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might pierce it. Idle fear; he had not thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the bright armor given him by the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not easily would yield to force of man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor could the rapid spear that left the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brave Aeneas pierce the shield; the gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gift of Vulcan, stopped it. Through two folds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It went, but three remained; for Vulcan’s skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fenced with five folds the disk⁠—the outer two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brass, the inner two of tin; between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was one of gold, and there the brazen spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was stayed. And then in turn Achilles threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His ponderous spear, and struck the orbèd shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne by Aeneas near the upper edge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thinnest was the brass and thinnest lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bullock’s hide. The Pelian ash broke through;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The buckler crashed; Aeneas, stooping low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held it above him, terrified; the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tearing both plate and hide of that huge shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed over him, and, eager to go on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunged in the earth and stood. He, when he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The massive lance which he had just escaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixed in the earth so near him, stood awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As struck with fear, and with despairing looks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles drew his trenchant sword and rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fury on Aeneas, uttering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fearful shout. Aeneas lifted up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stone, a mighty weight, which no two men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As men are now, could raise, yet easily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wielded it. Aeneas then, to save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His threatened life, had smitten with the stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His adversary’s buckler or his helm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his sword Pelides had laid dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan, had not he who shakes the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neptune, beheld him in that perilous hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And instantly addressed the immortal gods:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My heart, ye gods, is heavy for the sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the great-souled Aeneas, who will sink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hades overcome by Peleus’ son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rash man! He listened to the archer-god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo, who has now no power to save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chief from death. But, guiltless as he is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should he suffer evil for the wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of others? He has always sought to please</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With welcome offerings the gods who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the broad heaven. Let us withdraw him, then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this great peril, lest, if he should fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before Achilles, haply Saturn’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be displeased. And ’tis the will of fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he escape; that so the Dardan race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beloved by Jove above all others sprung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From him and mortal women, may not yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perish from earth and leave no progeny.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Saturn’s son already holds the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam in disfavor, and will make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas ruler o’er the men of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his sons’ sons shall rule them after him.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Imperial Juno with large eyes replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Determine, Neptune, for thyself, and save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas, or, all blameless as he is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abandon him to perish by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus’ son, Achilles. We have sworn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minerva and myself⁠—that never we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would aid in aught the Trojans to escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their day of ruin, though the town of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sink to the dust in the destroying flames⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flames kindled by the warlike sons of Greece.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then did Neptune, shaker of the shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go forth into the battle and amidst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clash of spears, and come where stood the chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas and his mighty foe, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus. Instantly he caused to rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A darkness round the eyes of Peleus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the buckler of Aeneas drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear with ashen stem and brazen blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid it at Achilles’ feet, and next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lifted high Aeneas from the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore him thence. O’er many a warrior’s head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a harnessed steed, Aeneas flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurled by the god, until he reached the rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that fierce battle, where the Caucons stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrayed for war. The shaker of the shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew near, and said to him in wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What god, Aeneas, moved thee to defy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Madly the son of Peleus, who in might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excels thee, and is dearer to the gods?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whenever he encounters thee in arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give way, lest thou, against the will of fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass down to Hades. When he shall have met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fate and perished, thou mayst boldly dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To face the foremost of the enemy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No other of the Greeks shall take thy life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and having thus admonished him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He left Aeneas there, and suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swept off the darkness that so thickly rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around Achilles, who, with sight now clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked forth, and, sighing, said to his great soul:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How strange is this! My eyes have seen today</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty marvel. Here the spear I flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is lying on the earth, and him at whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cast it, in the hope to take his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see no longer. Well beloved, no doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is this Aeneas by the immortal gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet that, I thought, was but an empty boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his. Well, let him go; I cannot think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he who gladly fled from death will find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The courage to encounter me again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now will I exhort the Greeks to fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This battle bravely, while I go to prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prowess of the other chiefs of Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, cheering on the soldiery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sprang into the ranks: “Ye noble Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avoid no more the Trojans; press right on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let each man single out his man, and fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eager heart. ’Tis hard for me to chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all my warlike might, so many men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fight with all. Not even Mars, the god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although immortal, nor Minerva’s self,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could combat with so vast a multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwearied; yet whatever I can do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hands and feet and strength, I give my word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to decline, or be remiss in aught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go to range the Trojan files, where none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think, will gladly stand to meet my spear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such stirring words he uttered, while aloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious Hector called, encouraging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men of Troy, and promising to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles: “Valiant Trojans, do not quail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before Pelides. In the strife of words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I too might bear my part against the gods;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But harder were the combat with the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For greater is their might than ours. The son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus cannot make his threatenings good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A part will he perform and part will leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Undone. I go to wait him; I would go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although his hands were like consuming flame⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands like flame, his strength the strength of steel.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: the Trojans at his stirring word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifted their lances, and the adverse hosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joined battle with a fearful din. Then came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo and admonished Hector thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hector, encounter not Achilles here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the armies, but amidst the throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tumult of the battle, lest perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He strike thee with the javelin or the sword.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: the Trojan chief, dismayed to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warning of the god, withdrew among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crowded ranks. Meantime Achilles sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the Trojans with a terrible cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slew a leader of the host, the brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iphition, whom a Naiad, at the foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of snowy Tmolus, in the opulent vale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hyda, bore to the great conqueror</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of towns, Otrynteus. As he came in haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble son of Peleus with his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote him upon the forehead in the midst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cleft the head in two. He fell; his arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clashed, and Achilles boasted o’er him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son of Otrynteus, terrible in arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art brought low; thou meetest here thy death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though thou wert born by the Gygaean lake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where lie, by fishy Hyllus and the stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of eddying Hermus, thy paternal fields.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus boastfully he spake, while darkness came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over Iphition’s eyes, and underneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chariots of the Greeks who foremost fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His corse was mangled. Next Achilles smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antenor’s son, Demoleon, gallantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breasting the onset of the Greeks. He pierced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His temple through the helmet’s brazen cheek;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brass stayed not the blow; the eager spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brake through the bone, and crushed the brain within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the brave youth lay dead. Achilles next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck down Hippodamas; he pierced his back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, leaping from his car, the Phrygian fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him. With a moan he breathed away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His life, as moans a bull when dragged around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The altar of the Heliconian king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By youths on whom the god that shakes the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks down well pleased. With such a moaning sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fiery spirit left the Phrygian’s frame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then sprang Achilles with his spear to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The godlike Polydorus, Priam’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose father bade him not to join the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he was younger than the other sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dearest of them all. In speed of foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had no peer. Yet, with a boyish pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show his swiftness, in the foremost ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ranged the field, until he lost his life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him with a javelin the swift-footed son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus smote as he was hurrying by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon pierced the middle of his back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, by its golden rings, the belt was clasped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the double corselet; the keen blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came forth in front; the Trojan with a cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell forward on his knees, and, bending, clasped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bowels in his hands. When Hector saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother thus upon the earth, there came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A darkness o’er his eyes, nor could he bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Longer to stand aloof, but, brandishing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spear, came forward like a rushing flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet the son of Peleus, who beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bounded toward him, saying boastfully:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“So, he is near whose hand hath given my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its deepest wound, who slew my dearest friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more are we to shun each other now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Timidly stealing through the paths of war.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then he said to Hector with a frown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Draw nearer, that thou mayst the sooner die.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The crested Hertor, undismayed, replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pelides, do not hope with empty words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To frighten me, as if I were a boy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insults and taunts I could with ease return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know that thou art brave; I know that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In might am not thy equal; but the event</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rests in the laps of the great gods, and they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May, though I lack the prowess, give thy life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into my hands when I shall cast my spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon that I bear is keen like thine.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having spoken, blandishing his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sent it forth; but with a gentle breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minerva turned it from the glorious Greek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid it at the noble Hector’s feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did Achilles, resolute to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His enemy, rush against him with a shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fury; but Apollo, with such power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As gods put forth, withdrew him thence, and spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A darkness round him. Thrice the swift of foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, rushed against him with his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrice he smote the cloud. But when once more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In godlike might, he made the assault, he spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These wingèd words of menace and reproach:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hound as thou art, thou hast once more escaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy death; for it was near. Again the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phoebus rescues thee; to him thy vows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are made ere thou dost trust thyself amidst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clash of javelins. I shall meet thee yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And end thee utterly, if any god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Favor me also. I will now pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strike the other Trojan warriors down.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and in the middle of the neck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote Dryops with his spear. The Phrygian fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him at his feet. He left him there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wounding with his spear Philetor’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Demuchus, tall and valiant, in the knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stayed him until he slew him with his sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from their chariot to the ground he cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laogonus and Dardanus, the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Bias, piercing with a javelin one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cutting down the other with his sword.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Tros, Alastor’s son, who came to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clasped his knees, in hope that he would spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A captive⁠—spare his life, nor slay a youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his own age⁠—vain hope! He little knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That not by prayers Achilles could be moved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor was he pitiful, nor mild of mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hard of heart⁠—while Tros embraced his knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And passionately sued, Pelides thrust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sword into his side; the liver came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth at the wound; the dark blood gushing filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Phrygian’s bosom; o’er his eyes there crept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A darkness, and his life was at an end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Approaching Mulius next, Achilles smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warrior at the ear; the brazen point</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed through the other ear; and then he slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agenor’s son, Echeclus, letting fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heavy-hilted sword upon his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just in the midst; the blade grew warm with blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gloomy death and unrelenting fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkened the victim’s eyes. Achilles next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wounded Deucalion, thrusting through his arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brazen javelin, where the sinews met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That strung the elbow. While with powerless arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wounded Trojan stood awaiting death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles drave his falchion through his neck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far flew the head and helm, the marrow flowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out the spine, and stretched upon the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deucalion lay. Pelides still went on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ertaking Rigmus, the renowned son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peireus, from the fruitful fields of Thrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote him in the stomach with his lance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There hung the weapon fixed; the wounded man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell from the car. At Areïthoüs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charioteer, who turned his steeds to flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles sent his murderous lance, and pierced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His back, and dashed him from the car, and left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His horses wild with fright. As when, among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep dells of an arid mountain-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A great fire burns its way, and the thick wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before it is consumed, and shifting winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither and thither sweep the flames, so ranged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles in his fury through the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From side to side, and everywhere o’ertook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His victims, and the earth ran dark with blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As when a yeoman underneath the yoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brings his broad-fronted oxen to tread out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White barley on the level threshing-floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sheaves are quickly trodden small beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heavy footsteps of the bellowing beasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So did the firm-paced coursers, which the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus guided, trample with their feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bucklers and corpses, while beneath the car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood steeped the axle, and the chariot-seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dripped on its rim with blood, that from below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was splashed upon them by the horses’ hoofs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the chariot-wheels. Such havoc made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides in his ardor for renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till his invincible hands were foul with blood.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
