<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book XV: The Fifth Battle at the Ships</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-15" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Fifth Battle at the Ships</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The anger of Jupiter on awaking appeased by Juno’s denial that she had instigated Neptune to aid the Greeks⁠—Iris despatched to recall Neptune from the field⁠—Mars, enraged at the death of his son Ascalaphus and arming to aid the Trojans, is restrained by Minerva⁠—Hector healed by Apollo⁠—His return to the field⁠—The Greeks driven back to the ships by the Trojans, who attempt to set the fleet on fire⁠—Defence of the ships by Ajax.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Now when the Trojans in their flight had crossed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rampart and trench, and many had been slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the pursuing Greeks, they made a halt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside their chariots, in despair and pale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With terror. Meanwhile Jupiter awoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Ida’s height, from slumber by the side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Juno, goddess of the golden throne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once he rose and saw the Trojan host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Routed, and, following close upon their flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Argive warriors putting them to rout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aided by Neptune, sovereign of the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hector lying on the field among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fellow-warriors, breathing painfully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vomiting blood, and senseless, for the arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That smote was not the feeblest of the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Father of immortals and of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld and pitied him, and terribly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frowned upon Juno, and bespake her thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O evil minded Juno, full of guile!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy arts have made the noble Hector leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The combat, and have forced his troops to flee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know not whether’t were not well that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst taste the fruit of thy pernicious wiles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chastised by me with stripes. Dost thou forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou didst swing suspended, and I tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two anvils to thy feet, and bound a chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold that none could break around thy wrists?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then didst thou hang in air amid the clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the gods of high Olympus saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pity. They stood near, but none of them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were able to release thee. Whoso came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my reach I seized, and hurled him o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven’s threshold, and he fell upon the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce breathing. Yet the passion of my wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caused by the wrongs of godlike Hercules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not to be so calmed; for craftily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hadst thou called up the violent northern blast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To chase him far across the barren deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drive him from his course to populous Cos.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I rescued him at length, and brought him back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Argos famed for steeds, though after long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many hardships. I remind thee now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this, that thou mayst see of what avail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter thy dissembled love and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy cunning strategies will be to thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Juno, large-eyed and august,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shuddered, and answered Jove with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Be witness, Earth, and the great Heavens above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waters of the Styx that glide beneath⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That dreadful oath which most the blessed gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revere⁠—be witness, too, that sacred head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thine, and our own nuptial couch, by which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would not rashly swear at any time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That not by my persuasion Neptune went⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shaker of the shores⁠—to harass Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hector, and to aid the cause of Greece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went self-counselled; he had seen the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pressed grievously beside their fleet, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compassion on them. Yet would I advise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he obey thy word, and take his place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thou, the Cloud compeller, bid’st him go.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She ended, and the Father of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mortals smiled, and said, in wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Large-eyed, imperial Juno, wouldst thou sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council with the immortals, and assist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My purposes, then Neptune, though at heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He were averse, would yet conform his will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mine and thine. If thou dost truly speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from thy heart, go now to where the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assemble, summon Iris, and with her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The archer-god Apollo. Give in charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Iris that she hasten to the host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the mailed Greeks, and bid king Neptune leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle for his palace. Let the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus, preparing Hector for the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathe strength into his frame, that so he lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sense of pain which bows his spirit now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he shall force the Greeks again to flee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In craven fear. Then shall their flying host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall back upon the galleys of the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus, who shall send into the fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friend Patroclus. Him the mighty spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector shall o’erthrow before the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilium, after many a Trojan youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall by his hand have fallen, and with them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My noble son, Sarpedon. Roused to rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shall the great Achilles take the life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector. Be it from this time my care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the assaults of Trojans in the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be beaten back, till by Minerva’s aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks possess the lofty town of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still am I angry, nor will I allow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the ever-living gods to aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks, until the prayer of Peleus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall fully be accomplished, as my word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nod were given, when Thetis clasped my knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entreating me to honor, signally,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her son, Achilles, spoiler of walled towns.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the white-armed goddess willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obeyed him, and from Ida’s summit flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To high Olympus. As the thought of man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flies rapidly, when, having travelled far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thinks, “Here would I be, I would be there,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flits from place to place, so swiftly flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imperial Juno to the Olympian mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there she found the ever-living gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assembled in the halls of Jupiter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These, as they saw her, starting from their seats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reached forth their cups to greet her. All the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She overlooked, and took the beaker held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By blooming Themis, who in haste had run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet her, and in wingèd accents said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why comest thou, O Juno! with the look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one o’ercome with fear. Hath Saturn’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy lord, disquieted thy soul with threats?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The white-armed goddess Juno answered her:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ask me not, heavenly Themis⁠—thou dost know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cruel, arrogant temper that is his⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sit presiding at the common feast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this fair palace of the gods, and thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all in heaven shall hear what evils Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has threatened. All, I think, will not rejoice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear the tidings, be they gods or men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though some contentedly are feasting now.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, imperial Juno took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her place, and all the gods within the halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jupiter were grieved. The goddess smiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only with the lips; her forehead wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the jetty brows no sign of joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thus she spake in anger to the rest:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Vainly, and in our madness, do we strive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Father Jove. We come and seek by craft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or force to move his stubborn will; he sits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart, unyielding, unregarding, proud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the vast strength and power in which he stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above all other of the deathless gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear therefore patiently whatever ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sends to each. Already, as I learn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath Mars his share of sorrow. In the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ascalaphus hath perished, whom he loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dearly, beyond all other men, and whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fiery god acknowledged as his son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus she spake, Mars smote his sinewy thighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his dropped hands, and sorrowfully said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Be not offended with me, ye who make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your dwelling on Olympus, if I go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to the Achaian fleet, and there avenge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slaughter of my son, though I be doomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fall before the thunderbolt of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lie in blood and dust among the dead.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and summoned Fear and Flight to yoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His steeds, and put his glorious armor on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then greater and more terrible had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The avenging wrath of Jupiter inflamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the gods, if Pallas in her fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all the heavenly dwellers had not left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her throne, and, rushing through the portals, snatched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The helmet from his head, and from his arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shield, and from his brawny hand the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid the brazen weapon by, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rebuked the fiery temper of the god:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou madman, thou art frantic, thou art lost!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou not ears to hear, nor any shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor reason left? Hast thou not heard the words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of white-armed Juno, who so lately left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Olympian Jupiter? Wouldst thou return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In pain and sorrow to the Olympian heights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven back ingloriously, and made the cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many miseries to all the gods?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Jove would leave the Trojans and their foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gallant Greeks, and turn on us, and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ruin upon Olympus. He would seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guilty and guiltless in his rage alike.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore I counsel thee to lay aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resentment for the slaughter of thy son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since braver men and stronger have been slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will be slain hereafter. Vain it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seek from death to save the race of man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She said, and, leading back the fiery Mars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seated him on his throne, while Juno called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo forth, with Iris, messenger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heaven, and thus in wingèd accents spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Jove calls you both to Ida. When ye reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its heights, and look upon his countenance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receive his sovereign mandate and obey.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake imperial Juno, and withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took her seat again, while they in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew toward the mount of Ida, seamed with rills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nurse of savage beasts. Upon the top</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Gargarus they found the Thunderer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Saturn, sitting. In a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fragrant haze he sat concealed; the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entered and stood before the God of Storms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who saw them not displeased, so speedily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had they obeyed his consort. First he turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Iris, and in wingèd accents said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Haste thee, swift Iris, and report my words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To royal Neptune, and report them right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid him, withdrawing from the battle-field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repair to the assembly of the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the great ocean. If he disobey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contemning my command, then bid him think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maturely, whether, mighty though he be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He can withstand when I put forth my power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against him. Greater is my strength than his,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And elder-born am I. Yet in his pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heart he dares to call himself my peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though all the others look on me with awe.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus spake the god, and Iris, whose swift feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are like the wind, obeyed, and downward plunged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ida’s height to sacred Troy. As when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snow-flakes or icy hail are dropped to earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From clouds before the north wind when it sweeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sky, so darted Iris to the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stood by mighty Neptune’s side, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O dark-haired shaker of the shores, I bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A message from the Aegis-bearer, Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou, withdrawing from the battle-field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repair to the assembly of the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the great ocean. If thou disobey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contemning his command, then hear his threat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will come hither and put forth his power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against thee, and he warns thee not to tempt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strife; for greater is his power than thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he is elder-born, though in thy pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heart thou dost declare thyself the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him whom all the rest regard with awe.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Illustrious Neptune answered with disdain:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In truth an arrogant speech; he seeks by forte</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bar me from my purpose, who can claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rights equal to his own, though great his power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are three brothers⁠—Rhea brought us forth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of Saturn⁠—Jupiter, and I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pluto, regent of the realm below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three parts were made of all existing things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each of us received his heritage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lots were shaken; and to me it fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dwell forever in the hoary deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pluto took the gloomy realm of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, lastly, Jupiter the ample heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And air and clouds. Yet doth the earth remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With high Olympus, common to us all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore I yield me not to do his will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great as he is; and let him be content</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his third part. He cannot frighten me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gestures of his arm. Let him insult</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With menaces the daughters and the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his own loves, and give them law, since they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perforce must hear, and patiently submit.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the fleet-footed Iris spake again:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O dark-haired Neptune, shall I bear from thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This harsh, defiant answer back to Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or shall it yet be changed? The prudent mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yields to the occasion, and thou knowest well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Furies wait upon the elder-born.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake in turn the god who shakes the shores:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O goddess Ins, thou hast wisely said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An excellent thing it is when messengers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know how to counsel well. But in my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soul a wrathful sense of injury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arises when he chides with insolent words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me, who was equal with him in my lot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And born to equal destinies. Yet now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although offended, I give way; but this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I tell thee, and ’tis from my heart⁠—if he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spite of me and Pallas, spoiler-queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Juno, Mercury, and Vulcan, spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The towers of Troy⁠—if he refuse to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ruin on her, and glory on the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let him know that hatred without end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or intermission is between us two.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he spake, the shaker of the shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quitted the Grecian army, took his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seaward, and plunged into the deep. The host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perceived their loss. Then Cloud-compelling Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned to Apollo and addressed him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now go at once to Hector, mailed in brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beloved Phoebus, for the god who shakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth, departing to the ocean-deeps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avoids our wrath; else had the other gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even they who far beneath the earth surround</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Saturn, heard our quarrel. Well it is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For both of us that he, although enraged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Braved not my arm, for otherwise the strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not been ended without sweat. Now take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fringèd aegis in thy hands, and shake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its orb before the warrior Greeks, to fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hearts with fear. I give, O archer-god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious Hector to thy charge. Revive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The might that dwelt within him, till the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reach, in their flight, the fleet and Hellespont;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shall it be my care, by word and deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give them rest and respite from their toils.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: Apollo hearkened and obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father, darting down from Ida’s height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the fleet falcon, chaser of the dove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swiftest of the race of birds. He found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector, the warlike Priam’s noble son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer on his bed. He sat upright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life was coming back; he knew again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friends; the heavy breathing ceased; the sweat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was stanched; the will of aegis-bearing Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revived the warrior’s strength. The archer-god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus, approached, and, standing by him, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why, Hector, son of Priam, dost thou sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Languishing thus, apart from all the host?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has aught of evil overtaken thee?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the crested Hector feebly said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who mayst thou be, O kindest of the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thus dost question me? Hast thou not heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the great warrior Ajax, with a stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote me upon the breast, and made me leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle-field, where I o’ertook and slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrades by the galleys of the Greeks?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought to be this day among the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Pluto’s mansion; even now it seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I was breathing my dear life away.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake again Apollo, archer-god:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Take courage, for the son of Saturn sends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ida’s summit one who will attend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aid thee⁠—Phoebus of the golden sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long practised to defend thy Troy and thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise now, encouraging thy numerous host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of charioteers to press with their swift steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight toward the roomy galleys of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go before to smooth for them the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn the Achaian bands, and make them flee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and into the great ruler’s breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathed strength and courage. As a stabled horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fed at his crib with barley, breaks the thong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fastened him, and, issuing, scours the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where he was wont in some smooth-flowing stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bathe his sides⁠—he holds his head aloft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proudly, and o’er his shoulders streams the mane⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consciously beautiful, he darts away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On nimble knees, that bear him to the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows so well, and pastures of the mares;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So after he had hearkened to the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved the swift feet of Hector, and he flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cheer his horsemen on. As peasant men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rush with their dogs in chase of horned stag</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or mountain goat, whose refuge is among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thickets and lofty rocks, nor can they take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their prey, for at their clamor there appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A maned lion in the way, and turns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chasers back, although in hot pursuit⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus did the Greeks embattled close pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men of Ilium, striking with their swords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And two-edged spears; but when at length they saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector among the ranks of armèd men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hearts were troubled, and their courage sank.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thoas, Andrannon’s son, the bravest far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Aetolians, skilled to cast the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And combat hand to hand, addressed the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council few excelled him, when the youths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assembled for debate. With prudent speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thoas bespake his fellow-warriors thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Gods! What a marvel do mine eyes behold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector has risen from death! We fully thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each one of us, that, smitten by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Telamonian Ajax, he had died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some god hath rescued and restored to strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Hector who hath slain, and yet will slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fear, so many Greeks. He comes not thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading the charge without the aid of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The God of Thunders. Now let all of us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow this counsel: bid the multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retreat upon the ships, and let the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who boast ourselves the bravest of the host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand firm and breast his onset, and so break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its fury with our lifted spears. I think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all his rage, he will be slow to fling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself into a band of armèd Greeks.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; they hearkened and at once complied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ajaxes, the Prince Idomeneus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teucer, Meriones, and Meges, peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mars, assembled all the chiefs, and ranked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their files to encounter Hector and his band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trojans, while the multitude fell back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Greek galleys. Then, in close array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan host moved forward. Hector led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The van in rapid march. Before him walked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus, the terrible aegis in his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dazzlingly bright within its shaggy fringe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Vulcan forged, the great artificer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And given to Jupiter, with which to rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armies of men. With this in hand he led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assailants on. The Achaians kept their ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In serried ranks, and a sharp yell arose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Greeks and Trojans. Arrows from the string</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew through the air, and spears from valiant hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some pierced the breasts of warrior-youths, but more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell half-way ere they reached their aim, and plunged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the ground, still hungering for their prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As long as Phoebus held the aegis still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapons reached and wounded equally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both armies, and in both the people fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ever when the god looked face to face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the Greek knights, and shook the orb, and gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty shout, he made their hearts to sink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within their bosoms, and their courage fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when two beasts of prey at dead of night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly, while their keeper is away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scatter a herd of beeves or flock of sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the disheartened Greeks were put to rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Phoebus sent among them fear, and gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Victory to Hector and the men of Troy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, as the lines were broken, man slew man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First Stichius fell by Hector’s hand, and next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arcesilaus; one was chief among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mailed Boeotians, one the trusty friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brave Menestheus. Medon fell before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas, and with him Iasus died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Medon was great Otleus’ base-born son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ajax was his brother, and he dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Phylacè, an exile, for his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had slain the brother of his father’s wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The step-dame Eriopis, late espoused.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iasus was appointed to command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warriors sent from Athens, and he claimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His birth from Sphelus, son of Bucolus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mecistes fell before Polydamas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polites struck down Echius in the van,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Clonius died by great Agenor’s hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Paris, when Deiochus had turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To flee, among the foremost combatants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote him upon the shoulder from behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drave the brazen weapon through his heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, while the Trojans stripped the dead, the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fled every way, and, falling as they ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the trench and on the stakes, were driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back o’er the rampart. Hector lifted up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mighty voice, and bade the Trojans leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bloody spoil and hasten to the ships.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And whomsoever I shall find apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In any place, at distance from the ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will I slay him. None of all his kin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Women or men, shall build his funeral pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But dogs shall tear his limbs in sight of Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and on the shoulders of his steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laid the lash, and urged them toward the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cheered the Trojans on. They joined their shouts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his, and charged with all their steeds and cars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fearful was the din. Apollo marched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before them, treading down with mighty feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The banks of the deep ditch, and casting them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the middle, till a causey rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad, and of length like that to which a spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reaches when thrown by one who tries his strength.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er this the Trojans poured into the camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By squadrons, with Apollo still in front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding the marvellous aegis. He with ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erthrew the rampart. As a boy at play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the sea-shore sands in childish sport</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scatters with feet and hands the little mounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He reared, thus didst thou cause the mighty work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O archer Phoebus, which the Greeks had reared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With so much toil, to crumble. Thou didst fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hearts with eager thoughts of flight, till, hemmed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the assailants and their ships, they stopped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade each other stand, and raised their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the gods, and offered vows aloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gerenian Nestor, guardian of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With arms extended toward the starry skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prayed earnestly: “O Father Jove, if e’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fruitful Argos there were burned to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thighs of fattened oxen or of sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By one who asked a safe return to Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou didst promise it, remember him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God of Olympus, and avert from us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The day of evil. Suffer not the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To perish, slaughtered by the sons of Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he supplicating. Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The All-disposer thundered as he heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man’s prayer. The Trojans by that voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of aegis-bearing Jove were moved to press</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks more resolutely, and were filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fiercer valor. As a mighty wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the great ocean, driven before a gale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as rolls up the hugest billow, sweeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the ship’s side, so swept the Trojan host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With dreadful tumult o’er the wall. They drave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their steeds into the camp, and there they fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the galley-sterns, and hand to hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With two-edged spears⁠—they from their cars, the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their black ships on high with long-stemmed poles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which lay upon the decks, prepared for fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At sea, and strongly joined to blades of brass.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Patroclus, while the Greeks and Trojans fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the wall, at distance from the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat with the brave Eurypylus in his tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amusing him with pleasant talk, and dressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wound with balms that calmed the bitter pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when he saw the Trojans bursting in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the wall, and heard the din, and saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians put to rout, he gave a cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sudden grief, and with his open hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote both his thighs, and sorrowfully said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Eurypylus, I cannot stay with thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much as thou needest me, for desperate grows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The struggle. Now let thine attendant take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charge of thee. I hasten to persuade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles to the field. Who knows but I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Jove’s good help, may change his purpose yet?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For potent are the counsels of a friend.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The hero spake, and instantly his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore him away. Meanwhile the Achaian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firmly withstood the onset of their foes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, though greater was their multitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They could not drive the Trojans from the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor could the Trojans break, with all their power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The serried lines, and reach the tents and ships.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a plumb-line, in the skilful hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shipwright well instructed in his art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Pallas, squares the beam that builds a barque,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So even was the fortune of the fray.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While some beside one galley waged the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And others round another, Hector came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To encounter Ajax the renowned, and both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fought for one ship. The Trojan could not drive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greek away, and burn his ship with fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the Greek drive the Trojan, for a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had brought him thither. Then did Ajax smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caletor, son of Clytius, with his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the breast, as he was bringing fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To burn the ship; he dropped the torch, and fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With clashing armor. Hector, as he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His kinsman lying slain amid the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the black galley, raised his voice, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called to the Lycians and the men of Troy:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear, men of Troy and Lycia, and ye sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Dardanus, who combat hand to hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand firm, and never yield this narrow ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rescue the son of Clytius, who has fallen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the ships, nor let the Achaians make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arms their spoil.” The hero spake, and aimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shining spear at Ajax, whom it missed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But smote Lycophron, Master’s son, who served</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ajax, and dwelt with him, for he had left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His native land, Cythera, having slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the gallant Cytherean race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him Hector smote upon the head beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ear with his keen weapon, as he stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near Ajax; from the galley’s stern he fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Headlong upon the ground, with lifeless limbs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then to his brother Teucer Ajax spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dear Teucer, see, our faithful friend is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Mastor, from Cythera’s isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom we had learned to honor equally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With our own parents in our palaces.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He falls before the great-souled Hector’s hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, then, are now thy shafts that carry death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where the bow that Phoebus gave to thee?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Teucer, hearkening, came in haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his bent bow, and quiver full of shafts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, standing near him, sent his arrows forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Trojan warriors. There he smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clitus, Pisenor’s eminent son, the friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the renowned Polydamas, who claimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His birth from Panthoüs. Clitus held the reins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guiding the coursers of Polydamas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where most the crowded Grecian phalanxes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wavered and broke, that so he might support</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector and his companions. Soon he met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave as he was, disaster which no hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had power to avert: the bitter arrow struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His neck behind, and from the chariot-seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell to earth; the startled steeds sprang back;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The empty chariot rattled. This the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polydamas perceived, and came to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His steeds, and gave them to Astinous,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Protiaon, charging him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep them ever near, and in his sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he, returning, mingled with the throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That struggled in the van. Then Teucer aimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another shaft at Hector mailed in brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, had it reached him fighting gallantly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had made him leave the battle, for his life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had ended there. The act was not unseen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By All-disposing Jupiter, whose power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protected Hector, and denied the Greek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glory hoped for; for he snapped in twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The firmly twisted cord as Teucer drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That perfect bow; the brazen arrow flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aside; the warrior’s hands let fall the bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, shuddering, he bespake his brother thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now woe is me! Some deity, no doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brings all our plans to nought. ’Tis he whose touch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes from my hand the bow, and snaps in twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cord just twisted, which I bound myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This morning to the bow, that it might bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The frequent arrow bounding toward the foe.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and thus replied the man of might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Telamonian Ajax: “Lay aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy bow, my brother, and thy store of shafts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since, in displeasure with the Greeks, a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has made them useless. Haste to arm thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a long spear, and on thy shoulders lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A buckler, and with these attack the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bid thy fellows stand. Let Trojans see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, even though the day thus far be theirs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They cannot lay their hands on our good ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without a mighty struggle. Let us all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be mindful of our fame for gallant deeds.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Teucer went to place the bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the tents, and on his shoulders hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fourfold shield, and placed on his grand brows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stately helmet with a horse-hair crest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That nodded fearfully. He took in hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ponderous spear with brazen blade, and sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forward with hasty steps, and stood beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother Ajax. Hector, when he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Teucer’s shafts had failed him, called aloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the men of Lycia and of Troy:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye men of Troy and Lycia, and ye sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Dardanus who combat hand to hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Acquit yourselves like men, my friends, and prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your fiery valor by these roomy ships;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I have seen with mine own eyes the shafts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their chief warrior rendered impotent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Jupiter. His hand is plainly seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the sons of men; to some he gives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glory above the rest; from some he takes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glory, and withdraws from their defence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He withers now the courage of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And succors us. Press closely round the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And combat. Whosoe’er among you all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wounded or beaten down, shall meet his death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So let him die; ’tis no inglorious fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To perish fighting in his country’s cause;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he shall leave his wife and children safe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His home and household store inviolate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If now the Greeks depart to their own land.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With words like these he filled their hearts anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With strength and courage. On the other side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ajax exhorted thus his warrior friends:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shame on you, Greeks! We perish here, unless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We rescue with strong arms our host and fleet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think ye that, should the crested Hector seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our galleys, ye may reach your homes on foot?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear ye not Hector’s voice, who, fiercely bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To burn our ships with fire, is cheering on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His warriors? To no dance he summons them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to the battle. Nought is left for us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And other counsel there is none, save this:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close with the foe; let every hand put forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its strength; far better’t were to die at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or make at once our safety sure, than thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To waste away, in lingering fight, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our ships, destroyed by weaker arms than ours.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the chief, and all who heard received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courage and strength. Then Hector put to death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Schedius, the son of Perimedes, prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Phocaeans. Ajax also slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laodamas, Antenor’s honored son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A chief of infantry. Polydamas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck down Cyllenian Otus, who had come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The comrade of Phylides, at the head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the high-souled Epeians. Meges saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rushed upon Polydamas, who sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aside unharmed, for Phoebus suffered not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Panthoüs thus to be o’erthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fighting among the foremost. But the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Meges wounded Croesmus in the breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell with clanging arms. The slayer stripped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corpse; but Dolops, son of Lampus, skilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wield the spear, leaped on him in the act.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lampus, the father, best of men, was son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of king Laomedon, and eminent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For warlike prowess. Dolops struck the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Meges in the midst; the corselet stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blade with its close jointed plates, and saved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warrior’s life. That corselet Phyleus brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ephyrè, beside the Selleis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given by his host, Euphetes, king of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his defence in battle, and it now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Preserved his son from death. Then Meges smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his sharp spear the helm that Dolops wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from its summit struck the horse-hair crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New-tinged with purple, and the cone entire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell midst the dust. While Meges, standing firm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fought thus, and hoped the victory, to his aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came warlike Menelaus, unobserved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, standing near, smote Dolops from behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the shoulder, and drave through the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till it appeared beyond. The Trojan fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his face, and both the Greeks rushed on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wrench the brazen armor from his limbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Hector saw his fall and called aloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the kindred of the slain. He first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rebuked the valiant Melanippus, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hicetaon, who but lately fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His slow-paced beeves at Percote, while yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The enemy was far from Troy; but when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians landed from their well-oared barques,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came to Troy, and took an eminent place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Trojans. Near to Priam’s halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had his dwelling, honored equally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Priam’s sons. Him Hector thus rebuked:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why, Melanippus, are we loitering thus?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grievest thou not to see thy kinsman slain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see’st thou not how eagerly the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are spoiling Dolops of his arms? Come on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With me. No time is this for distant fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But either we must rout the Greeks, or they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will level to the ground the lofty towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilium, and will slay its citizens.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and led the way; his godlike friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed him, while the son of Telamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ajax, exhorted thus the sons of Greece:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Be men, my friends, and let a noble dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shame possess your hearts, and jealously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look to each other’s honor in the heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of battle; for to men who flee there comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No glory, and that way no safety lies.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and all were eager to drive back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assaulting foe; they heeded well his words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drew around their barques a fence of mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Jove urged on the Trojans. Then it was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Menelaus, brave in battle, spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rouse the courage of Antilochus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Antilochus, there is no other Greek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Younger than thou, or fleeter; none so strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For combat. Would that, springing on the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou mightest strike some Trojan warrior down.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So speaking, he drew back; but he had roused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The courage of his friend, who, springing forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From midst the foremost combatants, took aim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First looking keenly round, with his bright spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which the Trojans shrank as they beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero cast it. Not in vain he threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon, for it struck upon the breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave Melanippus, Hicetaon’s son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the pap it smote him as he came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell with ringing arms; Antilochus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang toward him like a hound that springs to seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wounded fawn, which, leaping from its lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is stretched disabled by the hunter’s dart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sprang the stout Antilochus on thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Melanippus!⁠—sprang to spoil thy limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of armor; but the noble Hector saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, hastening through the thick of battle, came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against him. Mighty as he was in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet ventured not Antilochus to wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His coming; but as flees a savage beast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conscious of guilty deed, when, having slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herdsman or hound, that kept the pastured kine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He steals away before a crowd of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fled the son of Nestor. On his rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans under Hector poured a storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of weapons, and the din was terrible.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet when he reached the serried ranks of Greece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned and stood. Meanwhile the Trojan host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like ravening lions, fiercely rushed against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The galleys, that the will of Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might be fulfilled; for now he nerved their limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With vigor ever new, while he denied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stout hearts and victory to the Greeks, and cheered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their foes with hope. His purpose was to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victory to Hector, Priam’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till he should cast upon the beaked ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fierce, devouring fire, and bring to pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The end for which the cruel Thetis prayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Therefore did Jove the All-disposer wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till from a burning galley he should see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flames arise. Then must the Trojan host⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was his will⁠—retreating from the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield to the Greeks the glory of the day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this he moved the already eager heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector, son of Priam, to attack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roomy ships. The hero was aroused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fury fierce as Mars when brandishing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spear, or as a desolating flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rages on a mountain-side among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thickets of a close-grown wood. His lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were white with foam; his eyes from underneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His frowning brows streamed fire; and as he fought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the hero’s temples fearfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The helmet nodded. Jupiter himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent aid from his high seat, and heaped on him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honor and fame beyond the other chiefs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they were many⁠—for his term of life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was to be short. Minerva even now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was planning to bring on its closing day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made fatal by the might of Peleus’ son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he strove to break the Grecian ranks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assaulting where he saw the thickest crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the best weapons; yet in vain he strove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all his valor. Through the serried lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could not break; the Greeks in solid squares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resisted, like a rock that huge and high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the gray deep abides the buffetings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the shrill winds and swollen waves that beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against it. Firmly thus the Greeks withstood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan host, and fled not. In a blaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of armor, Hector, rushing toward their ranks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell on them like a mighty billow raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the strong cloud-born winds, that flings itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a swift ship, and whelms it in its spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While fearfully among the cordage howls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blast; the sailors tremble and are faint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fear, as men who deem their death-hour nigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the Greek warriors were dismayed at heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As when a hungry lion suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Springs on a herd of kine that crop the grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By hundreds in the broad moist meadow-grounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the eye of one who never learned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guard his hornèd charge from beasts of prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ever walks before them or behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the grim spoiler bounds into the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes a prey of one, and all the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are scattered in affright, so all the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were scattered by the will of heaven before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector and Father Jove. Yet only one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Periphoetes of Mycenae, fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Copreus. Once his father went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An envoy from Eurystheus to the court</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mighty Hercules. The son excelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father in all gifts of form and mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In speed, in war, in council eminent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the noblest of his land. His death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought Hector new renown; for as he turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stepping by chance upon his buckler’s rim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That reached the ground⁠—the buckler which had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fence against the enemy’s darts⁠—he fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Backward, his helmet clashing fearfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around his temples. Hector saw, and came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste, and pierced his bosom with his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among his fellow-warriors, who with grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld, yet dared not aid him, such their awe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of noble Hector. Now the Greeks retired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among that row of galleys which were first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn up the beach; the foe poured after them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hot pursuit; again the Greeks fell back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Constrained, and left that foremost row behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stood beside their tents in close array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not dispersed throughout the camp, for shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fear restrained them, and unceasingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shouts they bade each other bravely stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chiefly Gerenian Nestor, wise to guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The counsels of the Greeks, adjured them all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in their parents’ name, to keep their ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, be men; so act that none may feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ashamed to meet the eyes of other men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think each one of his children and his wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His home, his parents, living yet or dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For them, the absent ones, I supplicate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bid you rally here, and scorn to fly.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and his brave words to every heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried new strength and courage. Pallas then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifted the heaven-sent cloud that veiled the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all things in the clear full light were seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either side, both where the galleys lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where the warriors struggled. They beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector the great in war, and all his host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both those who formed the rear and wielded not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their arms, and those who combated in front</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the ships. And now it pleased no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul of valiant Ajax to remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the thick squadrons with the other Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, striding on the galley-decks, he bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sea-pike two and twenty cubits long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huge, and beset with iron nails. As when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One who is skilled to vault on running steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chooses four horses from a numerous herd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the highway to a populous town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drives them, while men and women in a crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold his feats with wonder, as he leaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boldly, without a fall, from steed to steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And back again, and all the while they run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So on the lofty decks of those good ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From ship to ship flew Ajax, lifting up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mighty voice⁠—a shout that reached to heaven⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade the Greeks defend their fleet and tents.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor loitered Hector in those armèd throngs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy, but as a tawny eagle swoops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a flock of birds that seek their food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along a river’s border⁠—geese or cranes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or long-necked swans⁠—so Hector in hot haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang toward a galley with an azure prow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While mightily the power of Jove impelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero onward, and inflamed his train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With courage. Fiercely then around the ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The struggle was renewed. Thou wouldst have said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No toils of war could tire those resolute arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So stubbornly they fought. In every mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thought was this: the Greeks were in despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rescue, and believed their hour had come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To perish; every Trojan hoped to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fleet to flames, and slay the sons of Greece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thoughts like these the hostile warriors closed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Hector laid his hand upon the stern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a stanch galley, beautiful and swift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which Protesilaüs came to Troy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It never bore him back. Around its keel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans and the Greeks fought hand to hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slew each other. For no more they sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arrow or the javelin from afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting to see the wound it gave, but each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With equal fury pressed upon his foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With halberd and with trenchant battle-axe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huge sword and two-edged spear. Upon the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had fallen many a fair black-hilted sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With solid handles, some from slain men’s hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some from lopped arms of warriors; the dark earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran red with blood. But Hector, having laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hand upon the galley’s stern, held fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the carved point, and called upon his men:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bring fire, and press in throngs upon the foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now doth Jove vouchsafe to us a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worth all the past⁠—a day on which we make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ships our prey. Against the will of Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They landed on our coast, and brought on us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disasters many, through the coward fears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our own elders, who denied my wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat at the galleys, and held back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people. But if then the Thunderer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkened our minds, his spirit moves us now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In what we do, and we obey his will.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and they with fiercer valor fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the Greeks. Even Ajax could no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withstand the charge, but, fearing to be slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid a storm of darts withdrew a space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the seven-foot bench of rowers lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left the galley’s stern. There, as he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He watched the assailants keenly, and beat back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thrusts of his long spear whoever brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The firebrand. With terrific shouts he called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the Greeks to combat manfully:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, Achaian heroes, ministers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mars, be men, be mindful of your fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For valor. Do ye dream that in your rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are succors waiting us, or firmer walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That may protect us yet? Nay, no fenced town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have we for refuge, flanked with towers from which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh troops may take our place. Between the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And country of the well-armed Trojans lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our tents; our native land is far away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now our only hope of safety left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in our weapons: there is no retreat.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and mightily with his sharp spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrust at whoever of the men of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Hector’s bidding came with fire to burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The galleys. On the blade of that long spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero took them as they came, and slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In close encounter twelve before the fleet.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
