<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book XVIII: The Grief of Achilles for the Death of Patroclus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-18" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Grief of Achilles for the Death of Patroclus</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Lamentation of Achilles over Patroclus⁠—A visit of condolence from Thetis and her nymphs⁠—Appearance of Achilles on the entrenchments, and consequent alarm of the Trojans⁠—A council of war held by the Trojan Chiefs⁠—Advice of Polydamas to withdraw from the field into Troy opposed by Hector, and rejected⁠—Vulcan, engaged by Thetis to forge a new suit of armor for Achilles.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>As thus they fought with all the rage of fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antilochus, the nimble-footed, came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tidings to Achilles. Him he found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before his lofty galleys, deep in thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what he knew had happened. With a sigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero to his mighty spirit said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah me! Why should the Grecians thus be driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In utter disarray across the plain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I tremble lest the gods should bring to pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What most I dread. My mother told me once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the most valiant of the Myrmidons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet I live, cut off by Trojan hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall see the sun no more. It must be so:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave son of Menoetius has been slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhappy! ’Twas my bidding that, when once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The enemy with his firebrands was repulsed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He should not think to combat gallantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Hector, but should hasten to the fleet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he mused, illustrious Nestor’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew near Achilles, and with eyes that shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm tears he gave his sorrowful message thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son of the warlike Peleus, woe is me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For bitter are the tidings thou must hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what should not have been. Patroclus lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A naked corpse, and over it the hosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are fighting; crested Hector hath his arms.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and a black cloud of sorrow came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the chieftain. Grasping in both hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ashes of the hearth, he showered them o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head, and soiled with them his noble face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They clung in dark lumps to his comely vest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prone in the dust of earth, at his full length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tearing his disordered hair, he lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then wailed aloud the maidens whom in war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He and Patroclus captured. Forth they came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, thronging round him, smote their breasts and swooned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antilochus mourned also, and shed tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding Achilles by the hand, for much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His generous nature dreaded that the chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might aim at his own throat the sword he wore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Loud were the hero’s cries, and in the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His gracious mother, where she sat beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her aged father, heard them. She too raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wail of sorrow. All the goddesses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughters of Nereus, dwelling in the depths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ocean, gathered to her side. There came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glaucè, Thaleia, and Cymodocè,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nesaea, Speio, Halia with large eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thoa, and Cymothoë; nor stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Actaea, Limnoreia, Melita,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amphithoë, Iaera, Agavè,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doto, and Proto, and Dynamenè.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There came Dexamene, Amphinomè,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pherusa, Callianira, Panopè,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doris, and Galateia, the renowned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With these Nemertes and Apseudes came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Callianassa. Clymenè was there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Janeira and Janassa, and with them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maera, and Amatheia with bright hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Orithya, and whoever else,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Children of Nereus, bide within the deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The concourse filled the glimmering cave; they beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their bosoms, while the sorrowing Thetis spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear, sister Nereids, that ye all may know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sharpness of my sorrows. Woe is me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhappy! Woe is me! In evil hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mother of a hero⁠—me who gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Birth to so noble and so brave a son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first among the warriors, saw him grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a green sapling, reared him like a plant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within a fruitful field, and sent him forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his beaked ships to Ilium and the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the Trojans. Never shall I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That son returning to his home, the halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus. While he lives and sees the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of day his lot is sorrow, nor can I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Help him in aught, though at his side; and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go to look on my beloved son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And learn from him what grief, while he remains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloof from war, o’ertakes him in his tent.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and left the cavern. All the nymphs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went with her weeping. Round their way the waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ocean parted. When they reached the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fertile Troas, up the shore they went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ordered files to where, a numerous fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn from the water, round Achilles lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift ships of the Myrmidons. To him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His goddess mother came, and with a cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of grief embraced the head of her dear son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, mourning o’er him, spake these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why weepest thou, my son? What sorrow now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ercomes thy spirit? Speak, and hide it not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thou didst pray for once, with lifted hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has been fulfilled by Jove; the sons of Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven to their galleys, and with thy good help</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withdrawn from them, are routed and disgraced.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The swift Achilles, sighing deeply, made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This answer: “O my mother! True it is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Olympian Jove hath done all this for me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But how can that delight me, since my friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My well-beloved Patroclus, is no more?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He whom, of all my fellows in the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I prized the most, and loved as my own self,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is lost to me, and Hector, by whose hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was cut off, has spoiled him of his arms⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dreaded arms, a wonder to the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glorious, which the gods of heaven bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Peleus, sumptuous bridal gifts, when thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wert led by them to share a mortal’s bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet would that thou hadst evermore remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the immortal dwellers of the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Peleus had espoused a mortal maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since now thy heart must ache with infinite grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thy slain son, whom thou shalt never more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome returning to his home. No wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have I to live or to concern myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In men’s affairs, save this: that Hector first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierced by my spear, shall yield his life, and pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The debt of vengeance for Patroclus slain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Thetis, weeping, answered: “O my son!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon must thou die; thou sayest true; that fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hangs over thee as soon as Hector dies.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again the swift Achilles, sighing, spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Then quickly let me die, since fate denied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should aid my friend against the foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That slew him. Far from his own land he fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And longed for me to rescue him. And now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since I am never more to see the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love, and since I went not to defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus, nor the other Greeks, my friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of whom so many have fallen by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of noble Hector, but beside the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am sitting here, a useless weight on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mighty in battle as I am beyond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other Grecian warriors, though excelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By other men in council⁠—would that Strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might perish among gods and men, with Wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which makes even wise men cruel, and, though sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first as dropping honey, growing, fills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heart with its foul smoke. Such was my rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aroused by Agamemnon, king of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet now, though great my wrong, let things like these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rest with the past, and, as the time requires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us subdue the spirit in our breasts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go in quest of Hector, by whose hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My friend was slain. My death will I accept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whene’er to Jove and to the other gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shall seem good to send it. Hercules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though mighty and beloved of Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Saturn, could not shun his death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fate and Juno’s cruel wrath prevailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against him. I shall lie in death like him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If a like fate be measured out for me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet now shall I have glory; I shall do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What many a Trojan and Dardanian dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep-bosomed, wiping with both hands the tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their fair cheeks, shall bitterly lament;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well shall they perceive that, till this hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I paused from war. Thou lov’st me; but seek not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep me from the field, for that were vain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The silver-footed Thetis thus rejoined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Truly, my son, thy purpose is not ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rescue thy endangered friends from death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with the Trojans are thy beautiful arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brazen and dazzling bright; their crested chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector, exults to wear them: no long space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think, will he exult; his death is near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet go not to the battle-field until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine eyes shall look upon me yet again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I come tomorrow with the sun, and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright arms, the work of Vulcan’s royal hand.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So having said, and turning from her son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She thus bespake her sisters of the sea:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Return to the broad bosom of the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To its gray Ancient and my father’s halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell him all. I hasten to ascend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The summits of Olympus, there to ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Vulcan, the renowned artificer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armor of glorious beauty for my son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake: at once they plunged into the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Thetis, silver-footed goddess, sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Olympus, whence it was her hope to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New armor for her son. As thus her feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore her toward heaven, the Achaians, fleeing fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With infinite clamor, driven before the arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the man-queller Hector, reached the ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hellespont. Nor could the well-armed Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear off Patroclus from the shower of darts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For rushing on them came both foot and horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hector, son of Priam, like a flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fury. Thrice illustrious Hector seized</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The body by the heels to drag it off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And called his Trojans with a mighty shout.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice did the chieftains Ajax, terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In resolute valor, drive him from the dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet kept he to his purpose, confident</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own might, now charging through the crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now standing firm and shouting to his men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never losing ground. As when, at night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herdsmen that watch their cattle strive in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive a lion, fierce and famine-pinched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From some slain beast, so the two Ajaxes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all their valor, vainly strove to keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector, the son of Priam, from the corpse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now would he have dragged it thence, and won</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Infinite glory, had not Iris come⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goddess whose swift feet are like the wind⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Peleus’ son, a messenger from heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste, unknown to Jupiter and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other gods⁠—for Juno sent her down⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bid the hero arm. She came and stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside him, speaking thus with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Pelides, rise, most terrible of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In rescue of Patroclus, over whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They struggle fiercely at the fleet; for there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They slay each other⁠—these who fight to keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead, and those, the men of Troy, who charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drag him off to Ilium’s airy heights;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chief, illustrious Hector longs to seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corpse, and from the delicate neck to hew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The head, and fix it on a stake. Arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loiter no longer;⁠—rise, ashamed to leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus to be torn by Trojan dogs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thine will be the infamy, if yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corpse be brought dishonored to thy tent.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The swift Achilles listened and inquired:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Which of the gods, O Iris, speaks by thee?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Iris, whose swift feet are like the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered: “The glorious spouse of Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Juno, hath sent me. Even Saturn’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his high throne, knows not that I am sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor any other of the gods who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Olympus overspread with snow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But how,” the swift Achilles asked again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shall I go forth to war? They have my arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my beloved mother strictly bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should put no armor on until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw her face again. She promised me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A suit of glorious mail from Vulcan’s hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor know I any warrior here whose arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might serve me, save, perhaps, it were the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Telamonian Ajax, who, I hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in the van, and dealing death among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foe, in vengeance for Patroclus slain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the swift-footed Iris spake again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They have thy glorious armor; that we know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But go thou to the trench, and show thyself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To them of Troy, that, haply smit with fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They may desist from battle, and the host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Grecian warriors, overtoiled, may breathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a brief respite from the stress of war.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So the fleet Iris spake, and passed away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then arose Achilles, dear to Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While o’er his ample shoulders Pallas held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her fringèd aegis. The great goddess caused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden cloud to gather round his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kindled in the cloud a dazzling flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when smoke, ascending to the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hangs o’er some city in a distant isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which enemies beleaguer, swarming forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their own city, and in hateful strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contend all day, but when the sun goes down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forthwith blaze many bale-fires, sending up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A brightness which the neighboring realms may see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That haply they may send their ships and drive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war away⁠—so from the hero’s head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That flame streamed upward to the sky. He came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the wall and stood beside the trench,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor mingled with the Greeks, for he revered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mother’s words. He stood and called aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas, from the host, returned his shout⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shout that carried infinite dismay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the Trojan squadrons. As the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of trumpet rises clear when deadly foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay siege to a walled city, such was heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clear shout uttered by Aeacides.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hearts of all who heard that brazen voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were troubled, and their steeds with flowing manes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned backward with the chariots⁠—such the dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of coming slaughter. When the charioteers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld the terrible flame that played unquenched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the brow of the magnanimous son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus, lighted by the blue-eyed maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minerva, they were struck with panic fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice o’er the trench Achilles shouted; thrice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men of Troy and their renowned allies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell into wild disorder. Then there died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entangled midst their chariots, and transfixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By their own spears, twelve of their bravest chiefs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks bore off Patroclus from the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eager haste, and placed him on a bier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there the friends that loved him gathered round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lamenting. With them swift Achilles came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hot tears on his cheeks, as he beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His faithful comrade lying on his bier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mangled with many wounds, whom he had sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With steeds and car to battle, never more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To welcome him alive on his return.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now Juno, large-eyed and august, bade set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The never-wearied sun; unwillingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sank into the ocean streams. Then paused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble Greeks from that ferocious strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deadly in equal measure to both hosts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans also paused, and from their cars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unharnessed the fleet steeds, and ere they took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their evening meal assembled to consult.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing they held the council; no man cared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sit, for all were trembling from the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, long a stranger to the bloody field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles showed himself again. And now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Panthoüs, wise Polydamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to speak. Beyond the rest he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Things past and things to come, and he had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector’s companion, born in the same night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mighty in speech as Hector with the spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With prudent admonitions thus he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Consider well, my friends. My counsel is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we return, nor wait the holy morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, by the fleet and in the open plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from our city ramparts. While this man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was wroth with Agamemnon, we maintained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strife of far less peril with the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I was ever ready to encamp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By night beside the galleys, which we hoped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make our prize; but now I fear the might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of swift Pelides. He will not remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Content upon the space between the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And town, where Greeks and Trojans wage a war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of changeful fortune, but will strive to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city, and to carry off our wives.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>March we then homeward. Let my words prevail⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It must be so. The gentle Night now keeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nimble-footed hero from the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if tomorrow, issuing forth in arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He find us here, there are among us those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who will have cause to know him. Gladly then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will he find refuge who escapes his arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sacred Troy, and many a Trojan corpse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will feed the dogs and vultures. May mine ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear of it never. But if ye will heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My words, though sorrowful, ye shall be safe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assembled in the city squares at night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lofty towers and gates, with massive beams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polished and strongly fitted each to each,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will keep the town. Tomorrow we shall take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At dawn, our station on the towers, arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In armor, and his difficult task will be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from his ships, to fight us from below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after he has tired his high-necked steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With coursing round the ramparts to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to his galleys he must go; nor yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all his valor can he force his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the town to lay its dwellings waste⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dogs will feed upon his carcass first.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And crested Hector answered with a frown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The counsel thou hast given, Polydamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleases me not⁠—that we return to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pent up in Troy. Are ye not weary yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lying long imprisoned within walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And towers? The time has been that in all lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherever human speech is heard, the fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam’s city, for its treasured gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brass, was in all mouths. Those treasures now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have passed away; our dwellings have them not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much that we had was sold on Phrygia’s coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in Maeonia’s pleasant land, for Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty was displeased with us. But now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When politic Saturn’s son hath granted me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To win great glory at the fleet, and hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks imprisoned by the sea, refrain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idler, from laying counsels such as these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the people. Not a Trojan here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will follow them, nor would I suffer it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now hearken all, and act as I advise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First banquet, rank by rank, throughout the host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set your guards, and each of you keep watch;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then, if any Trojan stands in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his possessions, let him bring them all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the common stock, to be consumed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better that we enjoy them than the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tomorrow, with the dawn and all in arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We will do battle at the roomy ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Valiantly. If in truth the noble son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus choose to rise and to defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ships, so much the worse for him, since I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not for him desert the field, but stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firmly against him, whether he obtain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victory or I. The chance of war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is equal, and the slayer oft is slain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Hector spake: the Trojans shouted forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Applause, the madmen! Pallas took away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their reason; all approved the fatal plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector; no one ventured to commend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sober counsel of Polydamas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then they banqueted throughout the host;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all night long the Achaians mourned with tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus, while Pelides in the midst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading the ceaseless lamentation, placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His slaughter-dealing hands upon the breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his companion with continual sighs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a maned lion, from whose haunt within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thick, dark wood a hunter has borne off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whelps, returning finds them gone, and grieves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roams the valleys, tracking as he goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The robber, bent to find him, for his rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is fierce⁠—with such fierce sorrow Peleus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake, deeply sighing, to his Myrmidons:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O, idle were the words which once I spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When in our palace-halls I bade the chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Menoetius bear a cheerful heart. I said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I would bring to Opus yet again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laden with spoil from Ilium overthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His valiant son. But Jove doth not fulfil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plans of men. That both of us should stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth with our blood in Troy was the decree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fate, and never will the aged knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peleus receive me in his palace-halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning from the war, nor Thetis, she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who gave me birth; the earth will hold me here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, since after thee I take my place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In earth, Patroclus, I will not perform</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy funeral rites before I bring to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arms and head of the magnanimous chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector, who slew thee. By thy funeral pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will strike off in vengeance for thy death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heads of twelve illustrious Trojan youths.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou meanwhile, lying at the beaked ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shalt be lamented night and day, with tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By many a Trojan and Dardanian maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep-bosomed, won by our victorious spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After hard wars and opulent cities sacked.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, the great Achilles bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Place a huge tripod on the fire in haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cleanse Patroclus from the clotted blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They brought and set upon the glowing hearth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tripod for the bath, and in it poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water, and piled the wood beneath. The flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crept up the vessel’s rounded sides and warmed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The water. When within the murmuring brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It boiled, they washed the dead, and with rich oil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anointed him, and filled the open wounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ointment nine years old; and laying him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a couch, they spread from head to foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fine linen over him, and covered all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a white mantle. Through the hours of night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Myrmidons, lamenting their dead chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept round the swift Achilles. Then did Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to his wife and sister Juno speak:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Large-eyed, imperial Juno, thou hast now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accomplished thy desire, for thou hast roused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift Achilles. There is not a doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long-haired Argives owe their birth to thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And large-eyed Juno answered: “What strange words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Austere Saturnius, hast thou said? A man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mortal far less skilled in shaping means</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To compass ends, might do what I have done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against his fellow-man. Then should not I⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who boast to be the chief of goddesses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By birthright, and because I bear the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wife to thee who rulest o’er the gods⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plan evil to the Trojans, whom I hate?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they. Silver-footed Thetis came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile to Vulcan’s halls, eternal, gemmed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With stars, a wonder to the immortals, wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brass by the lame god. She found him there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweating and toiling, and with busy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plying the bellows. He was fashioning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tripods, a score, to stand beside the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his fair palace. All of these he placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On wheels of gold, that, of their own accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They might roll in among the assembled gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then roll back, a marvel to behold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So far they all were finished; but not yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were added the neat handles, and for these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The god was forging rivets busily.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thus he labored, with a mind intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his skilful task, on silver feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came Thetis. Charis, of the snowy veil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beautiful, whom the great god of fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vulcan, had made his wife, beheld, and came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forward to meet her, seized her hand, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Thetis of the flowing robe, beloved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And honored, what has brought thee to our home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou dost not often visit us. Come in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may pay the honors due a guest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So the bright goddess spake, and led the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seated Thetis on a sumptuous throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With silver studs divinely wrought, and placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A footstool, and called out to Vulcan thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come, Vulcan; Thetis here hath need of thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the great artist, Vulcan, thus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Then of a truth a goddess is within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom I must ever honor and revere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who from the danger of my terrible fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saved me, what time my shameless mother sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cast me from her sight, for I was lame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then great had been my misery, had not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eurynomè and Thetis in their laps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received me as I fell⁠—Eurynomè,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughter of billowy Ocean. There I dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine years, and many ornaments I wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brass⁠—clasps, buckles, bracelets, necklaces⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within a vaulted cave, round which the tides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the vast ocean murmured and flung up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their foam; nor any of the gods or men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew of my hiding-place, save only they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who saved me, Thetis and Eurynomè.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, as she is with us, I must make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fair-haired Thetis some thank-offering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For having rescued me. Haste, spread the board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amply with generous fare, while I shall lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aside my bellows and my implements.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and from his anvil-block arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty bulk; his weak legs under him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halting, moved painfully. He laid apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bellows from the fire, and gathered up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scattered implements with which he wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And locked them in a silver chest, and wiped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a moist sponge his face and both his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stout neck and hairy chest. He then put on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tunic, took his massive regal wand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his hand, and, tottering, sallied forth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two golden statues, like in form and look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To living maidens, aided with firm gait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The monarch’s steps. And mind was in their breasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they had speech and strength, and from the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had learned becoming arts. Beside their lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They walked and tended him. As he drew near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halting, to Thetis on the shining throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took the goddess by the hand and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What cause, O Thetis of the flowing robe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honored and dear, has brought thee to our home?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not often com’st thou hither. Freely say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever lies upon thy mind. My heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commands me to obey, if it be aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That can be done and may be done by me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Thetis answered, with a gush of tears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Vulcan! Of the goddesses who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Olympus, is there one who bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such bitter sorrows as Saturnian Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inflicts on me, distressed above them all?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me, of the ocean deities, he forced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take a mortal husband⁠—Peleus, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aeacus⁠—and to his bed I came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwillingly. Within his palace-halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worn with a late old age, my husband lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I have other woes; for when a son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was granted me, and I had brought him forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reared him, flourishing like a young plant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sapling in a fertile field, and great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the heroes⁠—thus maturely trained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sent him with his beaked ships to Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat with her sons; but never more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will it be mine to welcome him returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home to the halls of Peleus. While to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lives, and sees the sunshine, he endures</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Affliction, nor can I, though at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aid him in aught. The maiden whom the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decreed him as his prize, the king of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides, took away, and grief for her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consumes his heart. The Trojans keep the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beleaguered by their ships, nor suffer them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pass beyond their gates. The elder chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Implored him to relent, and offered him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large presents; he refused to avert the doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That threatened them himself, but sent instead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus to the war with his own arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with him sent much people. All the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fought before the Scaean gates; and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had Ilium fallen, but that Apollo slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave son of Menoetius, who had caused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vast slaughter⁠—slew him fighting in the van</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of war, and gave the glory of his death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hector. Therefore I approach thy knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ask for him, my son, so soon to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buckler and helm, and beautiful greaves, shut close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With clasps, and all the other arms complete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which in the war my son’s companion lost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now Achilles lies upon the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bitterly grieving in his inmost soul.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Vulcan, the great artist, answered her:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be comforted, and take no further thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this; for would I could as certainly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shield him from death’s dread summons when his hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is come at last, as I shall have for him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful armor ready to put on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such as every man, of multitudes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who look on it hereafter, shall admire.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So speaking he withdrew, and went where lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bellows, turned them toward the fire, and bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The work begin. From twenty bellows came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their breath into the furnaces⁠—a blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Varied in strength as need might be; for now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They blew with violence for a hasty task,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then with gentler breath, as Vulcan pleased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as the work required. Upon the fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laid impenetrable brass, and tin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And precious gold and silver; on its block</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Placed the huge anvil, took the ponderous sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And held the pincers in the other hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And first he forged the huge and massive shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Divinely wrought in every part⁠—its edge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clasped with a triple border, white and bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A silver belt hung from it, and its folds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were five; a crowd of figures on its disk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were fashioned by the artist’s passing skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For here he placed the earth and heaven, and here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great deep and the never-resting sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the full moon, and here he set the stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shine in the round heaven⁠—the Pleiades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Hyades, Orion in his strength, And the</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear near him, called by some the Wain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, wheeling, keeps Orion still in sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet bathes not in the waters of the sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There placed he two fair cities full of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one were marriages and feasts; they led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brides with flaming torches from their bowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the streets, with many a nuptial song.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the young dancers whirled, and flutes and lyres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave forth their sounds, and women at the doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood and admired. Meanwhile a multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was in the forum, where a strife went on⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two men contending for a fine, the price</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one who had been slain. Before the crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One claimed that he had paid the fine, and one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Denied that aught had been received, and both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called for the sentence which should end the strife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people clamored for both sides, for both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had eager friends; the heralds held the crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In check; the elders, upon polished stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat in a sacred circle. Each one took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turn, a herald’s sceptre in his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, rising, gave his sentence. In the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two talents lay in gold, to be the meed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him whose juster judgment should prevail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Around the other city sat two hosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shining armor, bent to lay it waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless the dwellers would divide their wealth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that their pleasant homes contained⁠—and yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assailants half. As yet the citizens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not complied, but secretly had planned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ambush. Their beloved wives meanwhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their young children, stood and watched the walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With aged men among them, while the youths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marched on, with Mars and Pallas at their head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both wrought in gold, with golden garments on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stately and large in form, and over all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conspicuous, in bright armor, as became</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods; the rest were of an humbler size.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when they reached the spot where they should lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ambush, by a river’s side, a place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For watering herds, they sat them down, all armed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shining brass. Apart from all the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They placed two sentries, on the watch to spy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The approach of sheep and horned kine. Soon came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herds in sight; two shepherds walked with them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, all unweeting of the evil nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Solaced their task with music from their reeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warriors saw and rushed on them, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drave away large prey of beeves, and flocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fair white sheep, whose keepers they had slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the besiegers in their council heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sound of tumult at the watering-place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sprang upon their nimble-footed steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And overtook the pillagers. Both bands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrayed their ranks and fought beside the stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote each other. There did Discord rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Tumult, and the great Destroyer, Fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One wounded warrior she had seized alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one unbounded yet, and through the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dragged by the foot another, dead. Her robe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was reddened o’er the shoulders with the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From human veins. Like living men they ranged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle-field, and dragged by turns the slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There too he sculptured a broad fallow field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of soft rich mould, thrice ploughed, and over which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walked many a ploughman, guiding to and fro</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His steers, and when on their return they reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The border of the field the master came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet them, placing in the hands of each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A goblet of rich wine. Then turned they back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the furrows, diligent to reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their distant end. All dark behind the plough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ridges lay, a marvel to the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like real furrows, though engraved in gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There, too, the artist placed a field which lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep in ripe wheat. With sickles in their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The laborers reaped it. Here the handfuls fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the ground; there binders tied them fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With bands, and made them sheaves. Three binders went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to the reapers, and behind them boys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bringing the gathered handfuls in their arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ministered to the binders. Staff in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The master stood among them by the side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the ranged sheaves and silently rejoiced.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile the servants underneath an oak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prepared a feast apart; they sacrificed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fatling ox and dressed it, while the maids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were kneading for the reapers the white meal.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A vineyard also on the shield he graved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful, all of gold, and heavily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laden with grapes. Black were the clusters all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vines were stayed on rows of silver stakes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew a blue trench round it, and a hedge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of tin. One only path there was by which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vintagers could go to gather grapes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young maids and striplings of a tender age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore the sweet fruit in baskets. Midst them all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A youth from his shrill harp drew pleasant sounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sang with soft voice to the murmuring strings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They danced around him, beating with quick feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ground, and sang and shouted joyously.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And there the artist wrought a herd of beeves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-horned, and sculptured all in gold and tin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They issued lowing from their stalls to seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their pasture, by a murmuring stream, that ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rapidly through its reeds. Four herdsmen, graved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In gold, were with the beeves, and nine fleet dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed. Two lions, seizing on a bull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the foremost cattle, dragged him off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearfully bellowing; hounds and herdsmen rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rescue him. The lions tore their prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lapped the entrails and the crimson blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly the shepherds pressed around and urged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their dogs, that shrank from fastening with their teeth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the lions, but stood near and bayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There also did illustrious Vulcan grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fair, broad pasture, in a pleasant glade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of white sheep, and stalls, and cottages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a shepherd’s fold with sheltering roof.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And there illustrious Vulcan also wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dance⁠—a maze like that which Daedalus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the broad realm of Gnossus once contrived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fair-haired Ariadne. Blooming youths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lovely virgins, tripping to light airs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held fast each other’s wrists. The maidens wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fine linen robes; the youths had tunics on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lustrous as oil, and woven daintily.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maids wore wreaths of flowers; the young men swords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold in silver belts. They bounded now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a swift circle⁠—as a potter whirls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With both his hands a wheel to try its speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sitting before it⁠—then again they crossed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other, darting to their former place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A multitude around that joyous dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered, and were amused, while from the crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two tumblers raised their song, and flung themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About among the band that trod the dance.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Last on the border of that glorious shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He graved in all its strength the ocean-stream.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when that huge and massive shield was done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He forged a corselet brighter than the blaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fire; he forged a solid helm to fit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero’s temples, shapely and enchased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rare designs, and with a crest of gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And last he forged him greaves of ductile tin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the great artist Vulcan saw his task</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Complete, he lifted all that armor up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid it at the feet of her who bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles. Like a falcon in her flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down plunging from Olympus capped with snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She bore the shining armor Vulcan gave.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
