<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 12: The Battle at the Grecian Wall</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-12" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Battle at the Grecian Wall</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Division of the Trojan army, by advice of Polydamas, into five bodies, to storm the Greek entrenchments⁠—A breach in the wall made by Sarpedon⁠—One of the gates beaten open by Hector with a stone⁠—His entrance at the head of his troops.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Thus in the camp Menoetius’ valiant son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tended Eurypylus, and dressed his wounds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet in mingled throngs the warriors fought⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trojans and Greeks. Nor longer was the trench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A barrier for the Greeks, nor the broad wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which they had built above it to defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fleet; for all around it they had drawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trench, yet not with chosen hecatombs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paid to the gods, that so it might protect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The galleys and the heaps of spoil they held.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the favor of the gods it rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore was not long to stand entire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As long as Hector lived, and Peleus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was angered, and King Priam’s city yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not o’erthrown, so long the massive wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Built by the Greeks stood firm. But when at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bravest of the Trojans had been slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many of the Greeks were dead⁠—though still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others survived⁠—and when in the tenth year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city of Priam fell, and in their ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks went back to their beloved land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did Apollo and the god of sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consult together to destroy the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By turning on it the resistless might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rivers, all that from the Idaean heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flow to the ocean⁠—Rhesus, Granicus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heptaporus, Caresus, Rhodius,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aesepus, and Scamander’s hallowed stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Simoïs, in whose bed lay many shields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And helms and bodies of slain demigods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus Apollo turned the mouths of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All toward one spot; nine days against the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bade their currents rush, while Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured constant rain, that floods might overwhelm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rampart; and the god who shakes the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wielding his trident, led the rivers on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He flung among the billows the huge beams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stones which, with hard toil, the Greeks had laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the foundations. Thus he levelled all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the hurrying Hellespont, destroyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bulwarks utterly, and overspread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long broad shore with sand; and then he brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again the rivers to the ancient beds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which their gently flowing waters ran.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This yet was to be done in time to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Neptune and Apollo. Meanwhile raged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Battle and tumult round that strong-built wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The towers in all their timbers rang with blows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, driven as by the scourge of Jove, the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hemmed closely in beside their roomy ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trembled at Hector, the great scatterer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of squadrons, fighting, as he did before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all a whirlwind’s might. As when a boar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or lion mid the hounds and huntsmen stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearfully strong, and fierce of eye, and they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In square array assault him, and their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fling many a javelin;⁠—yet his noble heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fears not, nor does he fly, although at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His courage cause his death; and oft he turns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tries their ranks; and where he makes a rush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ranks give way;⁠—so Hector moved and turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the crowd, and bade his followers cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trench. The swift-paced horses ventured not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leap, but stood upon the edge and neighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloud, for the wide space affrighted them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hard it was to spring across, or pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From side to side, for on each side the brink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was steep, and bristled with sharp stakes, close set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strong, which there the warrior sons of Greece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had planted, a defence against the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No steed that whirled the rapid car along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could enter, but the soldiery on foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eagerly sought to pass, and in these words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polydamas to daring Hector spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hector, and ye who lead the troops of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our auxiliars! rashly do we seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To urge our rapid steeds across the trench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So hard to pass, beset with pointed stakes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Greek wall so near. The troops of horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot descend nor combat there: the space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is narrow: they would all be slain. If Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Thunderer of the skies, design to crush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks and succor Troy, I should rejoice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were the design at once fulfilled, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of Greece ingloriously cut off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from their Argos. But if they should turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon us, and repulse us from their fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we become entangled in the trench,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I deem no messenger would e’er go back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Troy from fighting with the rallied Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heed, then, my words, and let the charioteers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stay with the coursers at the trench, while we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armèd, and on foot, and all in close array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow our Hector. For the Greeks in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will strive to stem our onset if, in truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hour of their destruction be at hand.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake Polydamas; and Hector, pleased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear the prudent counsel, leaped to earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all his arms, and left his car. The rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rode with their steeds no more, but, hastily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dismounting, as they saw their noble chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each bade his charioteer hold back his steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reined at the trench, in ranks. And then, apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They mustered in five columns, following close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their leaders. First, the largest, bravest band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those who, with resolute daring, longed to break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rampart and to storm the fleet, were led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Hector and the good Polydamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joined with Cebriones⁠—for Hector left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His chariot to the care of one who held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An humbler station than Cebriones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paris, Alcathoüs, and Agenor led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A second squadron. Helenus, a son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam, and Deïphobus, a youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of godlike form, his brother, took command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of yet a third⁠—with whom in rank was joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero Asius, son of Hyrtacus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose bright-haired coursers, of majestic size,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had borne him from Arisba and the banks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Selleis. Aeneas led the fourth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave son of Anchises; and with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were joined Archilochus and Acamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sons of Antenor, skilled in arts of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The band of Troy’s illustrious allies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed Sarpedon, who from all the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had chosen, to partake in the command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glaucus and brave Asteropoeus. These</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He deemed the bravest under him; yet he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood foremost of them all in warlike might.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then all, with their stout bucklers of bull’s-hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adjusted to each other, bravely marched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the Greeks, who, as they deemed, must fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before them, and must fall by their black ships.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then all the other Trojans, and the allies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From foreign shores, obeyed the counsel given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By good Polydamas; but Asius, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hyrtacus, and prince of men, chose not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To leave his chariot and his charioteer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But drave with them against the roomy ships.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain youth!⁠—he was not destined to return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne by his steeds and chariot, from the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the fate he braved, to wind-swept Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His evil fate o’ertook him from the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of great Idomeneus, Deucalion’s son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For toward the galleys moored upon the left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hastened by the way in which the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With steeds and cars, retreated from the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither he drave his coursers; there he found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gates not closed, nor the long bar across,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But warriors held them open to receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In safety their companions as they fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From battle to the fleet. Exultingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned his coursers thither, and his men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed him, shouting; for they thought the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not abide their onset, but must yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And perish by their ships. Deluded men!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They met two mighty warriors at the gate⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave descendants of the Lapithae,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That warlike tribe: Pirithoüs’ gallant son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was one, named Polypoetes; with him stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leonteus, strong as Mars the slayer of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the tall gates they stood, as giant oaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand on the mountains and abide the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the tempestuous rains of all the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firm-planted on their strong and spreading roots.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So they, confiding in their strength of arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waited for mighty Asius hasting on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fled not. Onward came the hostile troop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their tough shields uplifted, and with shouts:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All rushing toward the massive wall they came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Following King Asius, and Iamenus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orestes, Thoön, Acamas the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Asius, and Oenomaüs. Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leonteus and his comrade had retired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within, encouraging the well-armed Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat for the fleet; but when they saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rout and panic of their flying host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They darted forth and fought before the gates⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fought like wild boars that in the mountains meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A clamorous troop of men and dogs, and dart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sideway at their assailants, break the trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to the root, and fiercely gnash their tusks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until some javelin strikes them, and they die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So on the breasts of the two warriors rang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shining brass, oft smitten; for they fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearlessly, trusting in the aid of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who held the wall, and their own valiant arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they who stood on the strong towershurled down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stones, to defend the Achaians and their tents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their swift ships. As snow-flakes fall to earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When strong winds, driving on the shadowy cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shower them upon the nourishing glebe, so thick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were showered the weapons from the hands of Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Trojans; and the helms and bossy shields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beaten by stones, resounded. Asius then⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Hyrtacus⁠—in anger groaned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote his thighs impatiently, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Father Jove! thou then art wholly false.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I did not look to see the men of Greece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand thus before our might and our strong arms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet they, like pliant-bodied wasps or bees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That build their cells beside the rocky way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quit not their abode, but, waiting there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunter, combat for their young⁠—so these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although but two, withdraw not from the gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will, till they be slain ot seized alive.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; but moved not thus the will of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who planned to give the glory of the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hector. Meanwhile, at the other gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fought other warriors⁠—but ’t were hard for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>0 Were I a god, to tell of all their deeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For round the wall on every side there raged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce as consuming fire, a storm of stones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks, in bitter anguish, yet constrained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fought for their fleet; and sorrowful were all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods who in the battle favored Greece.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the two Lapithae began the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pirithoüs’ son, brave Polypoetes, cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spear at Damasus; it broke its way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the helm’s brazen cheek⁠—nor that alone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right through the temple went the brazen blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crushed the brain within. He left him slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And next struck Pylon down, and Ormenus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leonteus, of the stock of Mars, assailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hippomachus, who from Antimachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Derived his birth; he pierced him at the belt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, drawing forth his trenchant sword, hewed down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In combat hand-to-hand, Antiphates;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He dashed him backward to the ground, and next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote Menon and Iamenus; and last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slew Orestes: at his feet they lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pile of dead, upon their mother Earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, as the twain were stripping from the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their glittering arms, the largest, bravest band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those who eagerly desired to break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rampart and to burn the ships with fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Following Polydamas and Hector, stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consulting at the trench. An augury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as they were in act to cross, appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the left: an eagle high in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the armies, in his talons bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A monstrous serpent, bleeding, yet alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And palpitating⁠—nor disabled yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For combat; for it turned, and on the breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wounded the eagle, near the neck. The bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In pain let fall his prize amid the host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flew away, with screams, upon the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans shuddered at the spotted snake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lying among them, and Polydamas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said thus to fearless Hector, standing near:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hector, thou almost ever chidest me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council, even when I judge aright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know it ill becomes the citizen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speak against the way that pleases thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In war or council⁠—he should rather seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strengthen thy authority; yet now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will declare what seems to me the best:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us not combat with the Greeks, to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fleet; for this, I think, will be the end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If now the omen we have seen be meant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For us of Troy who seek to cross the trench;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This eagle, flying high upon the left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the hosts, that in his talons bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A monstrous serpent, bleeding, yet alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath dropped it mid our host before he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his dear nest, nor brought it to his brood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So we, although by force we break the gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rampart, and although the Greeks fall back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not as happily retrace our way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many a Trojan shall we leave behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by the weapons of the Greeks, who stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fight to save their fleet. Thus will the seer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skilled in the lore of prodigies, explain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The portent, and the people will obey.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sternly the crested Hector looked, and spake:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Polydamas, the thing that thou hast said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleases me not, and easily couldst thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frame better counsels. If thy words convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy earnest thought, the gods assuredly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have made thee lose thy senses. Thou dost ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I no longer reverence the decree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove, the Thunderer of the sky, who gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His promise, and confirmed it. Thou dost ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I be governed by the flight of birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I regard not, whether to the right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And toward the morning and the sun they fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or toward the left and evening. We should heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The will of mighty Jupiter, who bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rule over gods and men. One augury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is, the surest and the best⁠—to fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For our own land. Why dreadest thou the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And conflict? Though we all should fall beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The galleys of the Greeks, there is no fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou wilt perish, for thou hast no heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stand against the foe;⁠—no warrior thou!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, if thou dare to stand aloof, or seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By words to turn another from the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear I wield shall take thy life at once.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and went before; and all his band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed with fearful clamor. Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The God of thunders, sending a strong wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the Idaean summits, drave the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full on the galleys, and made faint the hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Greek warriors, and gave new renown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hector and the men of Troy. For these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trusting in portents sent from Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their own valor, labored to break through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The massive rampart of the Greeks: they tore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The galleries from the towers, and levelled down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The breastworks, heaved with levers from their place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The jutting buttresses which Argive hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had firmly planted to support the towers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brought them to the ground; and thus they hoped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To force a passage to the Grecian camp.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not yet did they of Greece give way: they fenced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rampart with their ox-hide shields, and smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The enemy from behind them as he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the wall. The chieftains Ajax flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From tower to tower, and cheered the Achaians on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roused their valor⁠—some with gentle words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some with harsh rebuke⁠—whome’er they saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skulk from the toils and dangers of the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O friends!” they said, “ye great in war, and ye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of less renown, and ye of little note!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all are not alike in war⁠—the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Demands the aid of all, as well ye know:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now let no man turn him toward the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the threats of Hector, but press on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each exhort his fellow: so may Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who flings the lightning from Olympus, grant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, driving back their onset, we may chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The enemy to the very walls of Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus in the van they shouted, and awoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New courage in the Greeks. As when the flakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of snow fall thick upon a winter-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Jove the Sovereign pours them down on men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like arrows, from above;⁠—he bids the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathe not; continually he pours them down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And covers every mountain-top and peak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flowery mead, and field of fertile tilth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sheds them on the havens and the shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the gray deep; but there the waters bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The covering of snows⁠—all else is white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath that fast-descending shower of Jove;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So thick the shower of stones from either side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew toward the other⁠—from the Greeks against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans, and from them against the Greeks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fearful was the din along the wall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet would illustrious Hector and the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy have failed to force the gates and burst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bar within, had not all-seeing Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impelled his son Sarpedon to attack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks as falls a lion on a herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of horned beeves. The warrior held his shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A brazen orb, before him⁠—beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fenced with metal; for the armorer laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad plates without, while under these he sewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bull’s-hides the toughest, edged with golden wires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the rim. With this the warrior came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wielding two spears. As when a lion, bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the mountains, fasting long from flesh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes into the fenced pastures, without fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To prey upon the flock; and though he meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherds keeping watch with dogs and spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet will he not be driven thence until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He makes a spring into the fold and bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sheep away, or in the act is slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck by a javelin from some ready hand;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sarpedon, godlike warrior, thus was moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his great heart to storm the wall and break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the strong barrier; and to Glaucus, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lycia’s king Hippolochus, he said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why, Glaucus, are we honored, on the shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lycia, with the highest seat at feasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with full cups? Why look men up to us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to the gods? And why do we possess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad, beautiful enclosures, full of vines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wheat, beside the Xanthus? Then it well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Becomes us, foremost in the Lycian ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stand against the foe, where’er the fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is hottest; so our well-armed Lycian men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall say, and truly: ‘Not ingloriously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our kings bear rule in Lycia, where they feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On fatlings of the flock, and drink choice wine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they excel in valor, and they fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among our foremost.’ O my friend, if we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving this war, could flee from age and death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should not here be fighting in the van,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor would I send thee to the glorious war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, since many are the modes of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impending o’er us, which no man can hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shun, let us press on and give renown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To other men, or win it for ourselves!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and Glaucus not unwillingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard and obeyed. Right on the warriors pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading the Lycian host. Menestheus, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peteus, saw, and trembled; for they came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With evil menace toward his tower. He looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the Grecian lines in hope to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some chieftain there whose ready help might save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrades from their danger. He beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rulers Ajax, never tired of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing with Teucer, who just then had left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tent; and yet they could not hear his shout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fearful was the din that rose to heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all the shields, and crested helms, and gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smitten with missiles⁠—for at all the gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lycians thundered, struggling hard to break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A passage through them. Then Menestheus called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A herald near, and bade Thoötes bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A message to the leaders Ajax, thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Go, nobly born Thoötes, and in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call Ajax⁠—call them both, for that were best⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since terrible will be the slaughter here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fiercely are the Lycians pressing on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impetuous ever in assault. If there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fight be also urgent, then at least</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the brave Telamonian Ajax come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Teucer, the great archer, follow him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. The herald listened and obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flew along the summit of the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Built by the Greeks. He reached, and stood beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chieftains Ajax, and addressed them thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ajaces, leaders of the warlike Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The honored son of noble Peteus asks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye will come, though for a little space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid him and to share his warlike toils;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For terrible will be the slaughter there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fiercely are the Lycians pressing on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impetuous ever in assault. If here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fight be also urgent, then at least</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the brave Telamonian Ajax come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Teucer, the great archer, follow him.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ended. Ajax, son of Telamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearkened, and to his fellow-warrior said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Here, where the gallant Lycomedes stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ajax! remain, and, cheering on the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead them to combat valiantly. I go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stem the battle there, and when our friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are succored I will instantly return.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So speaking, Ajax, son of Telamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Departed thence, and with him Teucer, sprung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the same father. With them also went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pandion, carrying Teucer’s crooked bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They came to brave Menestheus at his tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And went within the wall and met their friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard-pressed⁠—for gallantly the Lycian chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And captains, like a gloomy tempest, rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up the tall breastworks; while the Greeks withstood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their onset, and a mighty clamor rose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Telamonian Ajax smote to death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Epicles, great of soul, Sarpedon’s friend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against that chief he cast a huge, rough stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lay high up beside a pinnacle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the wall. No man with both his hands⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such men as now are⁠—though in prime of youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could lift its weight; and yet he wielded it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloft, and flung it. Through the four-coned helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It crashed, and brake the skull within. Down plunged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lycian, like a diver, from his place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the high tower, and life forsook his limbs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Teucer also wounded with a shaft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glaucus, the brave son of Hippolochus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he leaped forth to scale the lofty wall⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wounded him where the naked arm was seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made him leave the combat. Back he sprang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hiding amid the crowd, that so the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might not behold the wounded limb, and scoff.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With grief Sarpedon saw his friend withdraw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet paused not from the conflict, but took aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Thestor’s son, Alcmaon, with his spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierced him; and drew the weapon out. The Greek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Following the spear, fell headlong; and his arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Studded with brass, clashed round him as he fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did Sarpedon seize, with powerful hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battlement; he wrenched it, and it came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To earth, and laid the rampart’s summit bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make a passage for the assailing host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ajax and Teucer saw, and both took aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together at Sarpedon: Teucer’s shaft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck in the midst the buckler’s glittering belt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just at the bosom; but Jove warded off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The death-stroke from his son, lest he should fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the galleys. Ajax, springing, struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The buckler with his spear, and pierced its folds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And checked the eager warrior, who gave way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little, yet retreated not, but turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encouraging the godlike Lycians thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Where, Lycians, is your fiery valor now?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were I the bravest, it were hard, alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For me to force a passage to the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I have cleared the way. Come on with me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light is the task when many share the toil.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake; and they who reverenced his words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of exhortation drew more closely round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their counsellor and sovereign, while the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above them made their phalanxes more strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the wall⁠—for urgent was the need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since neither could the gallant Syrians break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The barrier of the Greeks, and cut their way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through to the fleet, nor could the warlike Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive back the Lycians when they once had reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rampart. As two men upon a field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With measuring-rods in hand, disputing stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the common boundary, in small space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each one contending for the right he claims,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, kept asunder by the breastwork, fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warriors over it, and fiercely struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The orbèd bull’s-hide shields held up before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The breast, and the light targets. Many a one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was smitten when he turned and showed the back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unarmed, and many wounded through the shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The towers and battlements were steeped in blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heroes⁠—Greeks and Trojans. Yet were not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks thus put to flight; but, as the scales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are held by some just woman, who maintains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By spinning wool, her household⁠—carefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She poises both the wool and weights, to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The balance even, that she may provide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pittance for her babes⁠—thus equally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were matched the warring hosts, till Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conferred the eminent glory of the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Hector, son of Priam. He it was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who first leaped down into the space within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Grecian wall, and, with far-reaching voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus shouted, calling to the men of Troy:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Rush on, ye knights of Troy! rush boldly on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And break your passage through the Grecian wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hurl consuming flames against their fleet!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, cheering on his men. They heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rushed in mighty throngs against the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And climbed the battlements, to charge the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With spears. Then Hector stooped, and seized a stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which lay before the gate, broad at the base</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sharp above, which two, the strongest men⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As men are now⁠—could hardly heave from earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a wain. With ease he lifted it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, and brandished it: such strength the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Saturn gave him, that it seemed but light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a shepherd carries home with ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wether’s fleece⁠—he bears it in one hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And little is he cumbered with its weight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Hector bore the lifted stone, to break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beams that strengthened the tall folding-gates.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two bars within, laid crosswise, hold them firm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both fastened with one bolt. He came and stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before them; with wide-parted feet he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put forth all his strength, that so his arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might drive the missile home; and in the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He smote the folding-gates. The blow tore off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hinges; heavily the great stone fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within: the portals crashed; nor did the bars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withstand the blow: the shattered beams gave way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before it; and illustrious Hector sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the camp. His look was stern as night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And terribly the brazen armor gleamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That swathed him. With two spears in hand he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none except the gods⁠—when once his foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was on the ground⁠—could stand before his might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes shot fire, and, turning to his men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bade them mount the wall; and they obeyed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some o’er the wall, some through the sculptured gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured in. The Achaians to their roomy ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fled, and a fearful uproar filled the air.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
