<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book IV: The Breaking of the Truce, and the First Battle</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Breaking of the Truce, and the First Battle</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">A council of the gods, who decide that the war shall go on⁠—Minerva sent down to cause the breaking of the truce⁠—Pandarus persuaded by her to aim an arrow at Menelaus, who is wounded by it, and healed by Machaon⁠—Exhortations of Agamemnon addressed to the Greek chiefs⁠—A furious battle, and great slaughter on both sides.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime the immortal gods with Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his golden pavement sat and held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A council. Hebe, honored of them all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ministered nectar, and from cups of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They pledged each other, looking down on Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, purposely to kindle Juno’s mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To anger, Saturn’s son, with biting words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That well betrayed his covert meaning, spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Two goddesses⁠—the Argive Juno one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other Pallas, her invincible friend⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take part with Menelaus, yet they sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloof, content with looking on, while still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Venus, the laughter-loving one, protects</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her Paris, ever near him, warding off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stroke of fate. Just now she rescued him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he was near his death. The victory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Belongs to Menelaus, loved of Mars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let us all consider what shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The issue⁠—whether we allow the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all its waste of life, to be renewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or cause the warring nations to sit down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In amity. If haply it shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pleasure and the will of all the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let Priam’s city keep its dwellers still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Menelaus lead his Helen home.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, but Juno and Minerva sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with closed lips repined, for secretly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They plotted evil for the Trojan race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minerva held her peace in bitterness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heart and sore displeased with Father Jove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Juno could not curb her wrath, and spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What words, austere Saturnius, hast thou said!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou then render vain the toils I bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all my sweat? My very steeds even now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are weary with the mustering of the host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That threaten woe to Priam and his sons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet do thy will; but be at least assured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the other gods approve it not.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The cloud-compelling Jupiter replied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In anger: “Pestilent one! What grievous wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath Priam done to thee, or Priam’s sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou shouldst persevere to overthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His noble city? Shouldst thou through the gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilium make thy way, and there devour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the ramparts, Priam and his sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the men of Troy alive, thy rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haply might be appeased. Do as thou wilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that this difference breed no lasting strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between us. Yet I tell thee this⁠—and thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear what I say in mind: In time to come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should I design to level in the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some city where men dear to thee are born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek not to thwart my vengeance, but submit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now I fully yield me to thy wish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though with unwilling mind. Wherever dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The race of humankind beneath the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And starry heaven, of all their cities Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has been by me most honored⁠—sacred Troy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Priam, and the people who obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Priam, the wielder of the ashen spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there my altars never lacked their rites⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feasts, incense, and libations duly paid.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Juno, the majestic, with large eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoined: “The cities most beloved by me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are three⁠—Mycenae, with her spacious streets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Argos, and Sparta. Raze them to the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If they be hateful to thee. I shall ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contend to save them, nor repine to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fall; for, earnestly as I might seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rescue them from ruin, all my aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would not avail, so much the mightier thou.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet doth it ill become thee thus to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My efforts vain. I am a goddess, sprung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the same stock with thee; I am the child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of crafty Saturn, and am twice revered⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both for my birth and that I am the spouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thee who rulest over all the gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let us each yield somewhat⁠—I to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou to me; the other deathless gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will follow us. Let Pallas be despatched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that dread battle-field on which are ranged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans and Achaians, and stir up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan warriors first to lift their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the elated Greeks and break the league,”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She ended, and the Father of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mortals instantly complied, and called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minerva, and in wingèd accents said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Haste to the battle-field, and there, among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan and Achaian armies, cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan warriors first to lift their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the elated Greeks and break the league.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So saying, Jupiter to Pallas gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charge she wished already. She in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot from the Olympian summits, like a star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent by the crafty Saturn’s son to warn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seamen or some mighty host in arms⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A radiant meteor scattering sparkles round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So came and lighted Pallas on the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amidst the armies. All who saw were seized</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wonder⁠—Trojan knights and well-armed Greeks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a one addressed his comrade thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sure we shall have the wasting war again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stubborn combats; or, it may be, Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arbiter of wars among mankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decrees that the two nations dwell in peace.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Greeks and Trojans said. The goddess went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Trojan multitude disguised;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She seemed Laodocus, Antenor’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A valiant warrior, seeking through the ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For godlike Pandarus. At length she found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lycaon’s gallant and illustrious son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing with bucklered warriors ranged around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who followed him from where Aesepus flows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, standing near, she spake these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son of Lycaon! Wilt thou hear my words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave as thou art? Then wilt thou aim a shaft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Menelaus; thus wilt thou have earned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great thanks and praise from all the men of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chiefly from Prince Paris, who will fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foremost of all, thy hands with lavish gifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he shall look on Menelaus slain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warlike son of Atreus⁠—by thy hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid upon his lofty funeral pile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aim now at Menelaus the renowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An arrow, while thou offerest a vow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Lycian Phoebus, mighty with the bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou wilt bring to him a hecatomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of firstling lambs, when thou again shalt come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within thine own Zeleia’s sacred walls.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake Minerva, and her words o’ercame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weak one’s purpose. He uncovered straight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His polished bow, made of the elastic horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a wild goat, which, from his lurking-place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As once it left its cavern lair, he smote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pierced its breast, and stretched it on the rock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full sixteen palms in length the horns had grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the goat’s forehead. These an artisan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had smoothed, and, aptly fitting each to each,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polished the whole and tipped the work with gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bend that bow, the warrior lowered it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pressed an end against the earth. His friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held up, meanwhile, their shields before his face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest the brave sons of Greece should lift their spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against him ere the champion of their host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warlike Menelaus, should have felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arrow. Then the Lycian drew aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cover from his quiver, taking out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A well-fledged arrow that had never flown⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cause of future sorrows. On the string</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laid that fatal arrow, while he made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Lycian Phoebus, mighty with the bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vow to sacrifice before his shrine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A noble hecatomb of firstling lambs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he should come again to his abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his own Zeleia’s sacred walls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grasping the bowstring and the arrow’s notch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew them back, and forced the string to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His breast, the arrow-head to meet the bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the bow formed a circle. Then it twanged.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cord gave out a shrilly sound; the shaft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaped forth in eager haste to reach the host.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet, Menelaus, then the blessed gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deathless ones, forgot thee not; and first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove’s daughter, gatherer of spoil, who stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before thee, turned aside the deadly shaft.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a mother, while her child is wrapped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a sweet slumber, scares away the fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Pallas turned the weapon from thy breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And guided it to where the golden clasps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made fast the belt, and where the corselet’s mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was doubled. There the bitter arrow struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The belt, and through its close contexture passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fixed within the well-wrought corselet stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet reached the plated quilt which next his skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero wore⁠—his surest guard against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon’s force⁠—and broke through that alike;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there the arrow gashed the part below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dark blood came gushing from the wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when some Carian or Maeonian dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tinges with purple the white ivory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To form a trapping for the cheeks of steeds⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a horseman covets it, yet still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It lies within her chamber, to become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ornament of some great monarch’s steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make its rider proud⁠—thy shapely thighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy legs, and thy fair ankles thus were stained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Menelaus! with thy purple blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Agamemnon, king of men, beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark blood flowing from his brother’s wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shuddered. Menelaus, great in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt the like horror; yet, when he perceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That still the arrow, neck and barb, remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the mail, the courage rose again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That filled his bosom. Agamemnon, then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The monarch, sighing deeply, took the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Menelaus⁠—while his comrades round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like him lamented⁠—sighing as he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dear brother, when I sent thee forth alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat with the Trojans for the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ratified a treaty for thy death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since now the Trojans smite and under foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trample the league. Yet not in vain shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The treaty, nor the blood of lambs, nor wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured to the gods, nor right hands firmly pledged;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For though it please not now Olympian Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make the treaty good, he will in time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cause it to be fulfilled, and they shall pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dearly with their own heads and with their wives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And children for this wrong. And this I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my undoubting mind⁠—a day will come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When sacred Troy and Priam and the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Governed by Priam, mighty with the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall perish all. Saturnian Jove, who sits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On high, a dweller of the upper air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall shake his dreadful aegis in the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all, indignant at this treachery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such the event will be; but I shall grieve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bitterly, Menelaus, if thou die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy term of life cut short. I shall go back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my dear Argos with a brand of shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon me. For the Greeks will soon again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bethink them of their country; we shall then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave Argive Helen to remain the boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam and the Trojans⁠—while thy bones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall moulder, mingling with the earth of Troy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our great design abandoned. Then shall say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some haughty Trojan, leaping on the tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Menelaus: ‘So in time to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May Agamemnon wreak his wrath, as here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wreaked it, whither he had vainly led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An army, and now hastens to his home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his own land, with ships that bear no spoil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the brave Menelaus left behind.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shall some Trojan say; but, ere that time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May the earth open to receive my bones!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The fair-haired Menelaus cheerfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replied: “Grieve not, nor be the Greeks alarmed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For me, since this sharp arrow has not found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vital part, but, ere it reached so far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The embroidered belt, the quilt beneath, and plate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought by the armorer’s cunning, broke its force.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>King Agamemnon took the word and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dear Menelaus! Would that it were so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet the physician must explore thy wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his balsams soothe the bitter pain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then turning to Talthybius, he addressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred herald: “Hasten with all speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Talthybius; call Machaon, warrior-son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aesculapius, that much-honored leech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bring him to the Achaian general,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warlike Menelaus, whom some hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trojan or of Lycian, skilled to bend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bow, hath wounded with his shaft⁠—a deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him to exult in, but a grief to us.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; nor failed the herald to obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hastened at the word and passed among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The squadrons of Achaia, mailed in brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In search of great Machaon. Him he found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As midst the valiant ranks of bucklered men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood⁠—the troops who followed him to war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Triccae, nurse of steeds. Then, drawing near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herald spake to him in wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O son of Aesculapius, come in haste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Agamemnon calls thee to the aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of warlike Menelaus, whom some hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trojan or of Lycian, skilled to bend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bow, hath wounded with his shaft⁠—a deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him to exult in, but a grief to us.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Machaon’s heart was touched, and forth they went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the great throng, the army of the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when they came where Atreus’ warlike son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was wounded, they perceived the godlike man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing amid a circle of the chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bravest of the Achaians, who at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had gathered round. Without delay he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arrow from the fairly-fitted belt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The barbs were bent in drawing. Then he loosed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The embroidered belt, the quilted vest beneath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plate⁠—the armorer’s work⁠—and carefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erlooked the wound where fell the bitter shaft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleansed it from blood, and sprinkled over it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With skill the soothing balsams which of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The friendly Chiron to his father gave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While round the warlike Menelaus thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chiefs were busy, all the Trojans moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into array of battle; they put on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their armor, and were eager for the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then wouldst thou not have seen, hadst thou been there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Agamemnon slumbering, or in fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And skulking from the combat, but alert,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Preparing for the glorious tasks of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His horses, and his chariot bright with brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He left, and bade Eurymedon, his groom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Ptolemy Piraides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hold them apart still panting, yet with charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep them near their master, till the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he should need them, weary with the toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of such a vast command. Meantime he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On foot among his files of soldiery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whomsoe’er he found with fiery steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasting to battle, thus he cheered them on:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Argives! Let not your hot courage cool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Father Jove will never take the part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of treachery. Whosoe’er have been the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break the league, upon their lifeless limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall vultures feast; and doubt not we shall bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away in our good ships the wives they love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their young children, when we take their town.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But whomsoe’er he saw that kept afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the dread field, he angrily rebuked:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Argives! Who with arrows only fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Base as ye are, have ye no sense of shame?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why stand ye stupefied, like fawns, that, tired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With coursing the wide pastures, stop at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their strength exhausted! Thus ye stand amazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor think of combat. Wait ye for the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When to your ships, with their fair-sculptured prows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moored on the borders of the hoary deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans come, that haply ye may see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the great hand of Jove will shield you then?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus Agamemnon, as supreme in power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threaded the warrior-files, until he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where stood the Cretans. All in arms they stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around Idomeneus, the great in war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a wild boar in strength, he led the van,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in the rear, Meriones urged on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His phalanxes. The king of men rejoiced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blandly thus bespake Idomeneus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Idomeneus! I honor thee above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other knights of Greece, as well in war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in all other labors, and no less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In banquets, when the Achaian nobles charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their goblets with the dark-red mingled wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sign of honor. All the other Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drink by a certain measure, but thy cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands ever full, like mine, that thou mayst drink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou desirest. Hasten to the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the valor thou dost glory in.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Cretan chief, Idomeneus, replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Atrides, I remain thy true ally,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I have pledged my faith. But thou exhort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other long-haired Greeks, and bid them rush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat, since the Trojans break their oath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For woe and death must be the lot of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who broke the peace they vowed so solemnly.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. The son of Atreus, glad at heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed on among the squadrons, till he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the warriors Ajax formed their ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For battle, with a cloud of infantry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when some goatherd from the hill-top sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloud that traverses the deep before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strong west wind⁠—beholding it afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pitch-black it seems, and bringing o’er the waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A whirlwind with it; he is seized with fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drives his flock to shelter in a cave⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So with the warriors Ajax to the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved, dense and dark, the phalanxes of youths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trained for the combat, and their serried files</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bristling with spears and shields. The king of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw with delight, and spake these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O warriors Ajax, leaders of the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In brazen armor, I enjoin you not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rouse the courage of your soldiery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such word would ill become me, for yourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have made your followers eager to engage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In manful combat. Would to Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Pallas, and Apollo, that there dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In every bosom such a soul as yours!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then would the city of King Priam fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once, o’erthrown and levelled by our hands.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, he left them and went on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To others. There he found the smooth of speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nestor, the Pylian orator, employed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In marshalling his squadrons. Near to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alastor and the large-limbed Pelagon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chromius, and Haemon, prince among his tribe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Bias, shepherd of the people, stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cavalry with steeds and cars he placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In front. A vast and valiant multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of infantry he stationed in the rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be the bulwark of the war. Between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He made the faint of spirit take their place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, though unwillingly, they might be forced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat with the rest. And first he gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His orders to the horsemen, bidding them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep their coursers reined, nor let them range</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At random through the tumult of the crowd:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And let no man, too vain of horsemanship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trusting in his valor, dare advance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the rest to attack the men of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor let him fall behind the rest, to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our ranks the weaker. Whoso from his car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can reach an enemy’s, let him stand and strike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his long spear, for ’tis the shrewder way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By rules like these, which their brave hearts obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men of yore laid level towns and towers.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The aged man, long versed in tasks of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Counselled them thus. King Agamemnon heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delighted, and in wingèd words he said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O aged man, would that thy knees were firm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As is thy purpose, and thy strength as great!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But age, the common fate of all, has worn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy frame: would that some others had thy age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou wert of the number of our youths!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then answered Nestor, the Gerenian knight:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O son of Atreus, I myself could wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I were now as when of yore I struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The high-born Ereuthalion down. The gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestow not all their gifts on man at once.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I were then a youth, old age in turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is creeping o’er me. Still I keep among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The knights, and counsel and admonish them⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The office of the aged. Younger men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They who can trust their strength, must wield the spear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. The son of Atreus passed him by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleased with his words, and, moving onward, came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where⁠—with the Athenians, ever prompt to raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war-cry, grouped around him⁠—stood the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Menestheus, son of Peteus. Near to these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was wise Ulysses, with his sturdy band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Cephalonians. None of these had heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clamor of the battle, for the hosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trojan knights and Greeks had just begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To move, and there they waited for the advance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of other squadrons marching on to charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans and begin the war anew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king of men, Atrides, was displeased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spake, and chid them thus with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O son of Peteus, foster-child of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, the man of craft and evil wiles!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why stand ye here aloof, irresolute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wait for others? Ye should be the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet the foe and stem the battle’s rage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I bid you first to banquets which the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to their leaders, where ye feast at will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On roasted meats and bowls of pleasant wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, ere ye move, ye willingly would see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ten Grecian squadrons join the deadly strife.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The man of many arts, Ulysses, spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And frowned: “O Atreus’ son! What words are those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which pass thy lips? How canst thou say that we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avoid the battle? Ever when the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek bloody conflict with the Trojan knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, if thou wilt, and if thou givest heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To things like these, shalt with thine eyes behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father of Telemachus engaged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In combat with the foremost knights that form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan van. Thou utterest empty words.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>King Agamemnon, when he saw the chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Offended, changed his tone, and, smiling, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son of Laertes, nobly-born and wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses! It is not for me to chide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor to exhort thee, for thy heart, I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Counsels thee kindly toward me, and thy thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agrees with mine. We will discuss all this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter. If just now too harsh a word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was uttered, may the immortals make it vain!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So saying, he departed, and went on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To others. By his steeds and by his car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shone with fastenings of brass, he found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Tydeus, large-souled Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Sthenelus, the son of Capaneus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing beside him. Looking at them both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Agamemnon to Tydides spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wingèd words, and thus reproved the chief:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O son of Tydeus, that undaunted knight!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is there to appall thee? Why look through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spaces that divide the warlike ranks?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not thus did Tydeus feel the touch of fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ever foremost of his warriors fought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So they declare who saw his deeds, for I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was never with him, nor have ever seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero. Yet they say that he excelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All others. Certain is it that he once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entered Mycenae as a friendly guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With no array of soldiery, but came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With godlike Polynices. ’Twas the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When warrior-bands were gathered to besiege</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred walls of Thebes, and earnestly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They prayed that from Mycenae they might lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renowned auxiliars to the war, and we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would willingly have given the aid they asked⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we approved the prayer⁠—but Jove, with signs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of angry omen, changed our purposes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chiefs departed, journeying on to where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asopus flows through reeds and grass, and thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians sent an embassy to Thebes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Tydeus. There he met the many sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Cadmus at the banquets in the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of valiant Eteocles. Though alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among so many, and a stranger guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero feared them not, but challenged them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To vie with him in games; and easily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He won the victory, such aid was given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Pallas. Then the sons of Cadmus, skilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In horsemanship, were wroth, and privily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent fifty armed youths to lie in wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his return. Two leaders had the band⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maion, the son of Harmon, like a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In form, and Lycophontes, brave in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Autophonos. A bloody death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Tydeus give the youths. He slew them all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save Maion, whom he suffered to return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obedient to an omen from the gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was Aetolian Tydeus; but his son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A better speaker, is less brave in war.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and valiant Diomed, who heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king’s reproof with reverence, answered not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then spake the son of honored Capaneus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Atrides, speak not falsely, when thou know’st</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The truth so well. Assuredly we claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be far braver than our fathers were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We took seven-gated Thebes with fewer troops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than theirs, when, trusting in the omens sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From heaven, and in the aid of Jupiter, so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We led our men beneath the city walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sacred to Mars. Our fathers perished there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through their own folly. Therefore never seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To place them in the same degree with us.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The brave Tydides with a frown replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, hold thy peace, my friend, and heed my words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Agamemnon I will not complain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd of the people; it is his</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To exhort the well-armed Greeks to gallant deeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great glory will attend him if the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall overcome the Trojans, and shall take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred Ilium; but his grief will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bitter if we shall fail and be destroyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence think we only of the furious charge!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and from his chariot leaped to earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All armed; the mail upon the monarch’s breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rang terribly as he marched swiftly on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boldest might have heard that sound with fear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As when the ocean-billows, surge on surge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are pushed along to the resounding shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the western wind, and first a wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uplifts itself, and then against the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dashes and roars, and round the headland peaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tosses on high and spouts its spray afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So moved the serried phalanxes of Greece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To battle, rank succeeding rank, each chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Giving command to his own troops; the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marched noiselessly: you might have thought no voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was in the breasts of all that mighty throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So silently they all obeyed their chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their showy armor glittering as they moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In firm array. But, as the numerous flock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some rich man, while the white milk is drawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his sheepfold, hear the plaintive call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their own lambs, and bleat incessantly⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such clamors from the mighty Trojan host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose; nor was the war-cry one, nor one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voice, but words of mingled languages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they were called from many different climes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These Mars encouraged to the fight; but those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue-eyed Pallas. Terror too was there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Fright, and Strife that rages unappeased⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sister and comrade of man-slaying Mars⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who rises small at first, but grows, and lifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her head to heaven and walks upon the earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She, striding through the crowd and heightening</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mutual rancor, flung into the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contention, source of bale to all alike.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now, when met the armies in the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ox-hide shields encountered, and the spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And might of warriors mailed in brass; then clashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bossy bucklers, and the battle-din</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was loud; then rose the mingled shouts and groans</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those who slew and those who fell; the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran with their blood. As when the winter streams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rush down the mountain-sides, and fill, below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their swift waters, poured from gushing springs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some hollow vale, the shepherd on the heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hears the far roar⁠—such was the mingled din</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rose from the great armies when they met.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then first Antilochus, advancing, struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan champion Echepolus down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Thalysius, fighting in the van.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He smote him on the helmet’s cone, where streamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horse-hair plume. The brazen javelin stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixed in his forehead, piercing through the bone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And darkness gathered o’er his eyes. He fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As falls a tower before some stubborn siege.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Elephenor, son of Chalcodon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prince of the brave Abrantes, by the foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seized the slain chieftain, dragging him beyond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The reach of darts, to strip him of his arms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet dropped him soon, for brave Agenor saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as he stooped to drag the body, hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brazen spear and pierced the uncovered side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seen underneath the shield. At once his limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Relaxed their hold, and straight the spirit fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then furious was the struggle of the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Trojans o’er the slain; they sprang like wolves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon each other, and man slaughtered man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then by the hand of Ajax Telamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell Simoisius, in the bloom of youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anthemion’s son. His mother once came down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ida, with her parents, to their flocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the Simoïs; there she brought him forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon its banks, and gave her boy the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Simoisius. Unrequited now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was all the care with which his parents nursed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His early years, and short his term of life⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by the hand of Ajax, large of soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, when he saw him coming, Ajax smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the right pap the Trojan’s breast; the blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed through, and out upon the further side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell among the dust of earth, as falls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A poplar growing in the watery soil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some wide marsh⁠—a fair, smooth bole, with boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only on high, which with his gleaming axe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some artisan has felled to bend its trunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the circle of some chariot-wheel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withering it lies upon the river’s bank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So did the high-born Ajax spoil the corpse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Simoisius, Anthemion’s son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Antiphus, the son of Priam, clad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shining armor, saw, and, taking aim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast his sharp spear at Ajax through the crowd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon struck him not, but pierced the groin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one who was Ulysses’ faithful friend⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leucus⁠—as from the spot he dragged the dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell, the body dropping from his hold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, stung with fury at his fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed to the van, arrayed in shining brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew near the foe, and, casting a quick glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him, hurled his glittering spear. The host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trojans, as it left his hand, shrank back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon each other. Not in vain it flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But struck Democoön, the spurious son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam, who, to join the war, had left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abydos, where he tended the swift mares.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, to revenge his comrade’s death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote him upon the temple with his spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through both the temples passed the brazen point,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And darkness gathered o’er his eyes; he fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His armor clashing round him with his fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did the foremost bands, and Hector’s self,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall back. The Argives shouted, dragging off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slain, and rushing to the ground they won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then was Apollo angered, looking down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Pergamus, and thus he called aloud:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Rally, ye Trojans! Tamers of fleet steeds!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield not the battle to the Greeks. Their limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are not of stone or iron, to withstand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trenchant steel ye wield. Nor does the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fair-haired Thetis now, Achilles, take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part in the battle, but sits, brooding o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The choler that devours him, in his ships.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus from the city spake the terrible god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime Tritonian Pallas, glorious child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jupiter, went through the Grecian ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where’er they wavered, and revived their zeal.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Diores, son of Amarynceus, then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met his hard fate. The fragment of a rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was thrown by hand at his right leg, and struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ankle. Piroüs, son of Imbrasus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who came from Aenus, leading to the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Thracian soldiers, flung it; and it crushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tendons and bones, and down the warrior fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dust, and toward his comrades stretched his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gasped for breath. But he who gave the wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Piroüs, came up and pierced him with his spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth gushed the entrails, and the eyes grew dark.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Piroüs by Aetolian Thoas fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who met him with his spear and pierced his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the pap. The brazen weapon stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixed in the lungs. Then Thoas came and plucked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The massive spear away, and drew his sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrusting through him the sharp blade, he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His life away. Yet could he not despoil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slain man of his armor, for around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrades thronged, the Thracians, with their tufts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of streaming hair, and, wielding their long spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove him away. And he, though huge of limb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And valiant and renowned, was forced to yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To numbers pressing on him, and withdrew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus near each other stretched upon the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Piroüs, the leader of the Thracian band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he who led the Epeans, brazen-mailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diores, lay with many others slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then could no man, who near at hand beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle of that day, see cause of blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In aught, although, unwounded and unbruised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By weapons, Pallas led him by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In safety through the midst, and turned aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The violence of javelins; for that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw many a Trojan slain, and many a Greek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretched side by side upon the bloody field.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
