<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 5: The Exploits of Diomed</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Exploits of Diomed</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Valor of Diomed, aided by Minerva⁠—He is wounded by Pandarus, and healed by the Goddess, who forbids him to fight with any of the immortals, save Venus⁠—His combat with Pandarus and Aeneas⁠—Pandarus slain, and Aeneas, wounded and in great danger, rescued by Venus, who in the act is wounded by Diomed, and leaves Aeneas to the care of Apollo⁠—Descent of Mars to the field in aid of Hector⁠—Return of Aeneas to the field⁠—Descent of Juno and Minerva to resist Mars, who is wounded by Diomed⁠—Return of the gods to heaven.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Then Pallas to Tydides Diomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave strength and courage, that he might appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Achaians greatly eminent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And win a glorious name. Upon his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shield she caused a constant flame to play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to the autumnal star that shines in heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most brightly when new-bathed in ocean tides.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such light she caused to beam upon his crest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shoulders, as she sent the warrior forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the thick and tumult of the fight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Among the Trojans, Dares was the priest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Vulcan, rich and blameless. His two sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were Phegeus and Idaus, trained in all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arts of war. They left the host and came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet Tydides⁠—on the chariot they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he on foot; and now, as they drew near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First Phegeus hurled his massive lance. It flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er Diomed’s left shoulder and struck not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tydides cast his spear, and not in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It smote the breast of Phegeus in the midst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dashed him from his seat. Idaeus leaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To earth, and left the sumptuous car, nor dared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guard the slain, yet would have met his death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Vulcan had not borne him swiftly thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concealed in darkness, that he might not leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged man, his father, desolate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Tydeus took the steeds, and bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrades lead them to the fleet. Aghast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The valiant sons of Troy beheld the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Dares, one in flight, the other slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime the blue-eyed Pallas took the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mars, and thus addressed the fiery god:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Mars, Mars, thou slayer of men, thou steeped in blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Destroyer of walled cities! should we not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave both the Greeks and Trojans to contend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Jove to crown with glory whom he will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While we retire, lest we provoke his wrath?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, she led the violent Mars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From where the battle raged, and made him sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside Scamander, on its grassy bank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the Achaians put the sons of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To flight: each leader slew a foe; and first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king of men, Atrides, from his car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck down the huge-limbed Hodius, who was chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Halizonians. As he turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To flee, the Achaian, smiting him between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shoulders, drove the javelin through his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavily clashed his armor as he fell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then by Idomeneus was PhKstus slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Meonian Borus, who had come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Tarna, rich in harvests. As he sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his car, Idomeneus, expert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wield the ponderous javelin, thrust its blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through his right shoulder. From the car he fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dark night of death came over him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaian warriors following spoiled the slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The son of Atreus, Menelaus, slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his sharp spear Scamandrius, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Strophius, practised in the forest chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty hunter. Him had Dian taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strike whatever beast the woody wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breeds on the hills; but now availed him not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The favor of Diana, archer-queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor skill to throw the javelin afar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Menelaus, mighty with the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed him as he fled, and in the back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote him, between the shoulder-blades, and drave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon through. He fell upon the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Headlong, his armor clashing as he fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then Meriones slew Phereclus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Harmonius, the artificer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who knew to shape all works of rare device,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Pallas loved him. It was he who built</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fleet for Paris⁠—cause of many woes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the Trojans and to him⁠—for ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He understood the oracles of heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him did Meriones, pursuing long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ertake, and, smiting him on the right hip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierced through the part beneath the bone and near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bladder. On his knees with sad lament so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell, and death involved him in its shade.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then by Meges was Pedseus slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antenor’s base-born son, whose noble wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Theano, reared him with as fond a care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As her own children, for her husband’s sake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the mighty spearman, Phyleus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew near and smote him with his trenchant lance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where meet the head and spine, and pierced the neck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the tongue; and forth the weapon came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the teeth. He fell, and in the fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gnashed with his teeth upon the cold bright blade.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then did Evaemon’s son Eurypylus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike down Hypsenor, nobly born, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of great Dolopion, Scamander’s priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom all the people honored as a god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evaemon’s gallant son, o’ertaking him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In flight; with one stroke of his falchion hewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brawny arm away. The bloody limb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dropped to the ground, and the dark night of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came o’er his eyes: so cruel fate decreed. too</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus toiled the heroes in that stubborn fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor would you now have known to which array⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trojan or Greek⁠—Tydides might belong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For through the field he rushed with furious speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a swollen river when its current takes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The torrent’s swiftness, scattering with a sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bridges; nor can massive dikes withstand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its fury, nor embankments raised to screen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grassy meadows, while the rains of Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall heavily, and harvests, late the joy no</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of toiling youth, are beaten to the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus by Tydides the close phalanxes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy were scattered, nor could they endure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All numerous as they were, his strong assault.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Pandarus, Lycaon’s eminent son, us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld Tydides rush athwart the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breaking the ranks, he drew his crooked bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote the chief’s left shoulder as he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Striking the hollow corselet. The sharp point</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke through, and blood came gushing o’er the mail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then called aloud Lycaon’s eminent son:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Brave Trojans, great in mastery of steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Press on; the bravest of the Grecian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is smitten, nor, I think, can long survive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grievous wound, if it be true that I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the command of Phoebus, son of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have left my home upon the Lycian shore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus boastfully he spake; but his swift shaft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slew not Tydides, who had now withdrawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, standing by his steeds and chariot, spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Sthenelus, the son of Capaneus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Haste down, kind Sthenelus, and with thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw the sharp arrow from my shoulder here.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Sthenelus at once leaped down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood by his side, and from his shoulder drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wingèd arrow deeply fixed within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blood flowed forth upon the twisted rings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mail, while Diomed, the valiant, prayed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear me, O child of aegis-bearing Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goddess invincible! if ever thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst aid me or my father in the heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of battle, aid me, Pallas, yet again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me to slay this Trojan; bring him near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my javelin’s reach, who wounded me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now proclaims⁠—the boaster⁠—that not long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I behold the brightness of the sun.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So prayed he, and Minerva heard his prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lightened all his limbs⁠—his feet, his hands⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, standing near him, spake these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“War boldly with the Trojans, Diomed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For even now I breathe into thy frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ancestral might and fearless soul that dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Tydeus, peerless with the steed and shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! I remove the darkness from thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou mayst well discern the gods from men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if a god should tempt thee to the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beware to combat with the immortal race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only, should Venus, child of Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take part in battle, wound her with thy spear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The blue-eyed Pallas spake, and disappeared;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Diomed went back into the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mingled with the warriors. If before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spirit moved him fiercely to engage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men of Troy, a threefold courage now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inspired him. As a lion who has leaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a fold⁠—and he who guards the flock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has wounded but not slain him⁠—feels his rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waked by the blow;⁠—the affrighted shepherd then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ventures not near, but hides within the stalls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the forsaken sheep are put to flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, huddling, slain in heaps, till o’er the fence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The savage bounds into the fields again;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was Tydides midst the sons of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Astynoüs first he slew, Hypenor next,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd of the people. One he pierced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High on the bosom with his brazen spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote the other on the collar-bone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his good sword, and hewed from neck and spine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shoulder. There he left the dead, and rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Abas and to Polyeidus, sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of old Eurydamas, interpreter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of visions. Ill the aged man had read</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His visions when they joined the war. They died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Diomed, the valiant, spoiled the slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Xanthus and Thoön he encountered next,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of Phaenops, born in his old age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No other child had he, to be his heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he was worn with length of years. These two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tydides smote and took their lives, and left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grief to their father and regretful cares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since he no more should welcome their return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From war, and strangers should divide his wealth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then smote he Chromius and Echemon, sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Dardan Priam, in one chariot both.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on a herd of beeves a lion springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While midst the shrubs they browse, and breaks their necks⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heifer or ox⁠—so sprang he on the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And struck them, vainly struggling, from their car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spoiled them of their arms, and took their steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade his comrades lead them to the fleet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Aeneas, who beheld him scattering thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The embattled ranks before him, straightway went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the thick fight, amid encountering spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In search of godlike Pandarus. He found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lycaon’s blameless and illustrious son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stood before him, and addressed him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Where is thy bow, O Pandarus, and where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy wingèd arrows? Where the old renown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which no warrior here can vie with thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none upon the Lycian shore can boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he excels thee? Hasten, and lift up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy hands in prayer to Jupiter, and send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An arrow at this man, whoe’er he be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who thus prevails, and thus afflicts our host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes the knees of many a strong man weak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike him⁠—unless he be some god incensed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Troy for sacrifice withheld, since hard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is to bear the anger of a god.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lycaon’s son, the far-renowned, replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Aeneas, leader of the Trojans mailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In brass, to me this man in all things seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like warlike Diomed. I know his shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High helm, and steeds, and yet I may not say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That this is not a god. But if he be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chief of whom I speak, the warlike son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tydeus, not thus madly would he fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without some god to aid him. By his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is one of the immortals, with a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About his shoulders, turning from its aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swiftly flying arrow. ’T was but late</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I aimed a shaft that pierced the hollow mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his left shoulder, and I thought him sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Pluto, but I slew him not. Some god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must be offended with me. I have here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No steeds or car to mount. Far off at home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There stand within Lycaon’s palace-walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eleven chariots, fair and fresh and new:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each has an ample cover, and by each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are horses yoked in pairs, that champ their oats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their white barley. When I left my home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lycaon, aged warrior, counselled me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his sumptuous halls, that with my steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chariot I should lead the sons of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fierce battle. I obeyed him not:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far better if I had. I wished to spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My horses, lest, so largely fed at home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They might want food in the beleaguered town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, leaving them, I came on foot to Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confiding in my bow, which yet was doomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To avail me little, for already I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have smitten with my arrows the two chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tydides and Atrides, and from both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew the red blood, but only made their rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To flame the fiercer. In an evil hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I took my bow and quiver from the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came to lead the Trojans for the sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector. But if ever I return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see my native country and my wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my tall spacious mansion, may some foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike off my head if with these hands I fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break my bow in pieces, casting it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the flames, a useless weapon now.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Trojan chief Aeneas, answering, said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, talk not so; it cannot but be thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until upon a chariot, and with steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We try our prowess with this man in war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste, mount my chariot here, and thou shalt see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How well are Trojan horses trained to range</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The field of battle, in the swift pursuit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither and thither, or in rapid flight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they shall bring us safely to the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should Jove a second time bestow the meed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of glory on Tydides. Haste, and take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lash and well-wrought reins, while I descend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fight on foot; or haply thou wilt wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foe’s advance while I direct the steeds.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake again Lycaon’s eminent son:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Keep thou the reins, Aeneas, and still guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horses. With their wonted charioteer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The better shall they bear away the car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should we be forced to fly before the arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Diomed; lest, taking flight, they range</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmastered when they hear thy voice no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor bear us from the combat, and the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tydeus, having slain us, shall lead thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy firm-hoofed coursers. Therefore guide them still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Them and the chariot, while, with this keen spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wait the Greek, as he is rushing on.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They spake, and, climbing the magnificent car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned toward Tydides the swift-footed steeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble son of Capaneus beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said in wingèd words to Diomed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Tydides Diomed, most dear of men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see two warriors, strong, immensely strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming to combat with thee. Pandarus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is one, the skilled in archery, who boasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be Lycaon’s son; and by his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There comes Aeneas, glorying that he sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the large souled Anchises⁠—borne to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Venus. Mount we now our car and leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ground, nor in thy fury rush along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The van of battle, lest thou lose thy life.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The brave Tydides, with a frown, replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Speak not of flight; thou canst not yet persuade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mind to that. To skulk or shrink with fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle ill becomes me, and my strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is unexhausted yet. It suits me not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mount the chariot; I will meet the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as I am. Minerva will not let</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My spirit falter. Ne’er shall those swift steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear the two warriors hence⁠—if even one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escapes me. One thing more have I to say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keep it well in mind. Should Pallas deign⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wise, forecasting Pallas⁠—to bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On me the glory of o’ercoming both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stop thy swift horses, and tie fast the reins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To our own chariot, and make haste to seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horses of/Eneas, guiding them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence from the Trojan to the Grecian host;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they are of the stock which Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Thunderer gave to Tros. It was the price</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He paid for Ganymede, and they, of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the eye of morning and the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are of the choicest breed. The king of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anchises, stealthily and unobserved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought to the coursers of Laomedon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brood-mare, and obtained the race. Six colts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their offspring, in his courts were foaled. Of these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four for himself he kept, and in his stalls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reared them, and two of them, both apt for war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave /Eneas. If we make them ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The exploit will bring us honor and renown.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus they conferred. Meantime their foes drew near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Urging their fiery coursers on, and first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lycaon’s eminent son addressed the Greek:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My weapon, swift and sharp, the arrow, failed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay thee; let me try the javelin now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And haply that, at least, may reach its mark.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, brandishing his massive spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurled it against the shield of Diomed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brazen point broke through, and reached the mail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shouted with loud voice Lycaon’s son:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ha! thou art wounded in thy flank; my spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bites deep; nor long, I think, canst thou survive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And great will be my glory gained from thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But thus the valiant Diomed replied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Incapable of fear: “Thy thought is wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am not wounded, and I well perceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye will never give the conflict o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till one of you, laid low amid the dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pour out his blood to glut the god of war.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and cast his spear. Minerva kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon faithful to its aim. It struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nose, and near the eye; then passing on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt the teeth, the unrelenting edge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleft at its root the tongue; the point came out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the chin. The warrior from his car.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell headlong; his bright armor, fairly wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clashed round him as he fell; his fiery steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Started aside with fright; his breath and strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were gone at once, Aeneas, with his shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his long spear, leaped down to guard the slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the Achaians might not drag him thence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, lion-like, confiding in his strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stalked around the corpse, and over it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held his round shield and lance, prepared to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoever came, and shouting terribly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Tydides raised a stone⁠—a mighty weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as no two men living now could lift;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he, alone, could swing it round with ease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With this he smote Aeneas on the hip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the thigh joins its socket. By the blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He brake the socket and the tendons twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tore the skin with the rough, jagged stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero fell upon his knees, but stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fall with his strong palm upon the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er his eyes a shadow came like night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then had the king of men, Aeneas, died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for Jove’s daughter, Venus, who perceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His danger instantly⁠—his mother, she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bore him to Anchises when he kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beeves, a herdsman. Round her son she cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her white arms, spreading over him in folds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her shining robe, to be a fence against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapons of the foe, lest some Greek knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should at his bosom aim the steel to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His life. And thus the goddess bore away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that fierce conflict her beloved son.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor did the son of Capaneus forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bidding of the warlike Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But halted his firm-footed steeds apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the great tumult, with the long reins stretched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fastened to the chariot. Next, he sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seize the horses with fair-flowing manes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That drew the chariot of /Eneas. These</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drave away, far from the Trojan host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the well-greaved Achaians, giving them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In charge, to lead them to the hollow ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his beloved friend Deipylus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom he of all his comrades honored most,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As likest to himself in years and mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he climbed his car and took the reins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, swiftly drawn by his firm-footed steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed Tydides, who with cruel steel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought Venus, knowing her unapt for war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all unlike the goddesses who guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battles of mankind, as Pallas does,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or as Bellona, ravager of towns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ertaking her at last, with long pursuit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the throng of warring men, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of warlike Tydeus aimed at her his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wounded in her hand the delicate one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its sharp point. It pierced the ambrosial robe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought for her by the Graces, at the spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the palm joins the wrist, and broke the skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drew immortal blood⁠—the ichor⁠—such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from the blessed gods may flow; for they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eat not the wheaten loaf, nor drink dark wine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore they are bloodless, and are called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Immortal. At the stroke the goddess shrieked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dropped her son. Apollo in his arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received and in a dark cloud rescued him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest any of the Grecian knights should aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A weapon at his breast to take his life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime the brave Tydides cried aloud:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Leave wars and battle, goddess. Is it not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough that thou delude weak womankind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, if thou ever shouldst return, to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A part in battle, thou shalt have good cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To start with fear, when war is only named.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and she departed, wild with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For grievously she suffered. Instantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleet-footed Iris took her by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And led her from the place, her heart oppressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With anguish and her fair cheek deathly pale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She found the fiery Mars, who had withdrawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that day’s combat to the left, and sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spear and his swift coursers hid from sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In darkness. At his feet she fell, and prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her brother fervently, that he would lend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His steeds that stood in trappings wrought of gold:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dear brother, aid me; let me have thy steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear me to the Olympian mount, the home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gods, for grievously the wound I bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afflicts me. ’T was a mortal gave the wound⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tydides, who would even fight with Jove.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake; and Mars resigned to her his steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With trappings of bright gold. She climbed the car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still grieving, and, beside her, Iris took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her seat, and caught the reins and plied the lash, no</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On flew the coursers, on, with willing speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soon were at the mansion of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On high Olympus. There the active-limbed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleet Iris stayed them, loosed them from the car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fed them with ambrosial food. Meanwhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goddess Venus at Dione’s feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had cast herself. The mother round her child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threw tenderly her arms, and with her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caressed her brow, and spake, and thus inquired:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Which of the dwellers of the skies, dear child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has dealt thus cruelly with thee, as one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught in the doing of some flagrant wrong?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus did Venus, queen of smiles, reply:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The son of Tydeus, arrogant Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wounded me as I sought to bear away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From battle’s dangers my beloved son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas, dear beyond all other men:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now no longer does the battle rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the Greeks and Trojans, but the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Venture to combat even with the gods.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dione, great among the goddesses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoined: “Submit, my daughter, and endure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though inly grieved; for many of us who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the Olympian mount have suffered much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From mortals, and have brought great miseries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon each other. First, it was the fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mars to suffer, when Aloëus’ sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Otus and mighty Ephialtes, made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fetters fast upon his limbs. He lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chained thirteen months within a brazen cell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And haply there the god, whose thirst of blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is never cloyed, had perished, but for aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Eriboea gave, the beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His step-mother. She made his miseries known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Mercury, who set him free by stealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withered and weak with long imprisonment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Juno suffered when Amphitryon’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The valiant, dared to plant in her right breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A three-pronged arrow, and she writhed with pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pluto suffered, when the hero-son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of aegis-bearing Jove, with a swift shaft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote him beside the portals of the dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left him filled with pain. He took his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To high Olympus and the home of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grieving and racked with pain, for deep the dart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had pierced his brawny shoulder, torturing him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There Paean with his pain-dispelling balms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Healed him, for he was not of mortal race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O daring man and reckless, to make light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of such impieties and violate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred persons of the Olympian gods!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was the blue-eyed Pallas who stirred up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tydides to assail thee thus. The fool!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew not that the man who dares to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods in combat lives not long. No child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall prattling call him father when he comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning from the dreadful tasks of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let then Tydides, valiant though he be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beware lest a more potent foe than thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encounter him, and lest the nobly-born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aegialeia, in some night to come⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise daughter of Adrastus, and the spouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the horse-tamer Diomed⁠—call up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The servants of her household from their sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bewailing him to whom in youth she gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her maiden troth⁠—the bravest of the Greeks.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and wiped the ichor from the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Venus; at her touch the hand was healed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the pain left it. Meantime Pallas stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Juno, looking on, both teasing Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With words of sarcasm. Blue-eyed Pallas thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Addressed the god: “O Father Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou be angry at the word I speak?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Venus, wheedling some Achaian dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To join the host she loves, the sons of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caressed the fair, arrayed in gay attire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden buckle scratched her tender hand.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus she spake, the Father of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mortals, calling golden Venus near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said, with a smile: “Nay, daughter, not for thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are tasks of war; be gentle marriage-rites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy care; the labors of the battle-field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pertain to Pallas and the fiery Mars.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus with each other talked the gods, while still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great in battle, Diomed, pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas, though he knew that Phoebus stretched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arm to guard the warrior. Small regard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had he for the great god, and much he longed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strike tineas down and bear away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious arms he wore; and thrice he rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay the Trojan, thrice Apollo smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his glittering shield. But when he made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fourth assault, as if he were a god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The archer of the skies, Apollo, thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With menacing words rebuked him: “Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beware; desist, nor think to make thyself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The equal of a god. The deathless race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gods is not as those who walk the earth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the son of Tydeus, shrinking back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave way before the anger of the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sends his shafts afar. Then Phoebus bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas from the tumult to the height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sacred Pergamus, where stands his fane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there Latona and the archer-queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diana, in the temple’s deep recess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tended him and brought back his glorious strength.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime the bowyer-god, Apollo, formed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An image of Aeneas, armèd like him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round which the Trojans and Achaians thronged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many a heavy weapon-stroke that fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the huge orbs of their ox-hide shields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lighter bucklers. Now to fiery Mars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo spake: “Mars, Mars, thou plague of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou steeped in blood, destroyer of walled towns!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou not force this man to leave the field?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou not meet in arms this daring son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tydeus, who would even fight with Jove?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already has he wounded, in close fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goddess Venus at the wrist, and since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assaulted me as if he were a god.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He said, and on the heights of Pergamus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat down, while the destroyer Mars went forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the embattled Trojan ranks, to rouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their valor. In the form of Acamus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gallant Thracian leader, he bespake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of Jove-descended Priam thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O sons of Priam, him who claims descent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Jupiter! how long will ye submit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see your people slaughtered by the Greeks?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it until the battle-storm shall reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your city’s stately portals? Even now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hero whom we honor equally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the great Hector, our Aeneas, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the large-souled Anchises, is struck down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste, let us rescue our beloved friend.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and into every heart his words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried new strength and courage. In that hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sarpedon chid the noble Hector thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Where is the prowess, Hector, which was thine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So lately? Thou hast said that thou alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy kindred and thy brothers, could defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city, without armies or allies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I see none of these; they all, like hounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before a lion, crouch and slink away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the confederates bear the brunt of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am but an auxiliar come from far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Lycia, where the eddying Xanthus runs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There left I a beloved wife, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An infant child, and large possessions, such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As poor men covet. Yet do I exhort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Lycians to the combat, and myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would willingly engage this foe of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although I here have nothing which the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might bear or drive away. Thou standest still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile, nor dost thou bid the rest to keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their ground and bear the battle for their wives.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet have a care, lest, as if caught at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the strong meshes of a mighty net,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye find yourselves the captives and the prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of enemies, who quickly will destroy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your nobly-peopled city. These are thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That should engage thy mind by night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shouldst beg the chiefs of thine allies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called to thy aid from far, that manfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They meet the foe, and foil his fierce attack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take the cause of this reproach away.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sarpedon spake; and Hector, all in arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stung by his words, and leaping from his car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brandished his spears, and went among the hosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rallied them to battle. Terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The conflict that ensued. The men of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made head against the Greeks: the Greeks stood firm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ever thought of flight. As when the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strews chaff about the sacred threshing-floors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While wheat is winnowed, and before the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yellow Ceres separates the grain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From its light husk, which gathers in white heaps⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so the Greeks were whitened o’er with dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised in that tumult by the horses’ hoofs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rising to the brazen firmament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As toward the fight the charioteers again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Urged on their coursers. Yet the Greeks withstood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The onset, and struck forward with strong arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime the furious Mars involved the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In darkness, to befriend the sons of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And went through all the ranks, and well fulfilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mandate which Apollo gave the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wields the golden falchion, bidding him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindle the courage of the Trojan host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whene’er he saw the auxiliar of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minerva, leave the combat. Then the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought from the sanctuary’s inner shrine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas⁠—filling with recovered strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shepherd of the people. He beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrades placed himself, and they rejoiced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see him living and unharmed and strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ever; yet they questioned not; their task</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was different, set them by the god who bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver bow, and Mars the slayer of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raging Strife that never is appeased.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Ajaces and Ulysses and the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tydeus roused the Achaians to the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For of the strength and clamor of the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They felt no fear, but calmly stood, to bide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assault; as stand in air the quiet clouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Saturn’s son upon the mountain-tops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Piles in still volumes when the north wind sleeps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every ruder breath of blustering air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That drives the gathered vapors through the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus calmly waited they the Trojan host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor thought of flight. And now Atrides passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste along their ranks, and gave command:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, be men, and let your hearts be strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let no warrior in the heat of fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do what may bring him shame in others’ eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For more of those who shrink from shame are safe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than fall in battle, while with those who flee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is neither glory nor reprieve from death.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the king, and hurled his spear and smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deïcoön, the son of Pergasis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A chief, and a companion in the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the great-souled Aeneas. He in Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was honored as men honored Priam’s sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he was ever foremost in the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon struck his shield, yet stopped not there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, breaking through its folds and through the belt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transfixed the part beneath. The Trojan fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To earth, his armor clashing with his fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Aeneas slew the sons of Diodes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orsilochus and Crethon, eminent Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their father dwelt in Pherae nobly built,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid his riches. From Alpheius he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Derived his race⁠—a river whose long stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flows through the meadows of the Pylian land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orsilochus was to Alpheius born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lord over many men, and he became</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father of great Diocles, to whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twin sons were born, well trained in all the arts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of warfare⁠—Crethon and Orsilochus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These, in the prime of youth, with their black ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed the Argives to the coast of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Famed for its generous steeds. They left their home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To vindicate the honor of the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus⁠—Agamemnon, king of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Menelaus⁠—but they found their death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As two young lions, nourished by their dam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the thickets of some mighty wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seizing the beeves and fattened sheep, lay waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stables, till at length themselves are slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By trenchant weapons in the shepherd’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So by the weapons of Aeneas died</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These twain; they fell as lofty fir-trees fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, when Menelaus saw their fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty warrior, deeply sorrowing, rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the foremost, armèd in glittering brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brandishing his spear; for Mars had roused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His soul to fury, trusting he would meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas, and would perish by his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antilochus, the generous Nestor’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came also to the van, for anxiously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He feared mischance might overtake the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make the toils of their long warfare vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there he found the combatants prepared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For battle, with their trusty spears in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And standing face to face. At once he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His stand beside the monarch of the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At sight of the two warriors side by side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All valiant as he was, Aeneas shunned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The encounter. They, when they had drawn the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Grecian ranks, and to their friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given up the hapless brothers, turned to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their place among the foremost in the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, too, Pykemenes, a chief like Mars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leader of the Paphlagonian host⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A valiant squadron armèd with shields⁠—was slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides Menelaus, skilled to wield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The javelin, gave his death-wound. He transfixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shoulder at the collar-bone. Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antilochus against his charioteer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mydon, the brave son of Atymnias, hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stone that smote his elbow as he wheeled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His firm-paced steeds in flight. He dropped the reins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleaming with ivory as they trailed in dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antilochus leaped forward, smiting him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the temples with his sword. He fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gasping amidst the sand, his head immersed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to his shoulders⁠—for the sand was deep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there remained till he was beaten down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the horses’ hoofs. Antilochus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lashing the horses, drave them to the Greeks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hector beheld, and, springing with loud shouts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood mid the wavering ranks. The phalanxes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the brave Trojans followed him, for Mars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And terrible Bellona led them on⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bellona bringing Tumult in her train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Mars with brandished lance⁠—a mighty weight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now stalking after Hector, now before.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Him when the valiant Diomed beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He trembled; and, as one who, journeying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along a way he knows not, having crossed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A place of drear extent, before him sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A river rushing swiftly toward the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all its tossing current white with foam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stops and turns, and measures back his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So then did Diomed withdraw, and spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, how greatly must we all admire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This noble Hector, mighty with the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And terrible in war. There is some god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forever near him, warding off the stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of death; beside him yonder even now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands Mars in semblance of a mortal man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield, then, and with your faces toward the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall back, and strive not with the gods of heaven.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Even as he spake, the Trojan host drew near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hector slew two warriors trained to arms⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Menesthes and Anchialus⁠—who came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both in one chariot to the war. Their fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ajax, the son of Telamon, beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pitied, and drew near, and stood, and hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His glittering spear. It smote Ampheius, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Selagus, who, rich in lands and goods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abode in Paesus. In an evil hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He joined the cause of Priam and his sons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him at the belt the spear of Ajax smote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pierced the bowels. With a crash he fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then hastened mighty Ajax to strip off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The armor, but the Trojans at him cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their pointed spears that glittered as they flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many struck his shield. He pressed his heel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the slain, and from the body drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brazen spear, but could not from the breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loose the bright mail, so thick the weapons came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such the wary dread with which he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bravest of the Trojans closing round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many and fierce, and all with spears outstretched;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he, though strong and valiant and renowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven from the ground, gave way to mightier force.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So toiled the warriors through that stubborn fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When cruel fate urged on Tlepoemus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great and valiant son of Hercules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet Sarpedon, mighty as a god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now as each to each advanced⁠—the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grandson of the cloud-compeller Jove⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus first Tlepolemus addressed his foe:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sarpedon, Lycian monarch, what has brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee hither, trembling thus, and inexpert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle? Lying flatterers are they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That call thee son of Jupiter who bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aegis; for unlike the heroes thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born to the Thunderer in times of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor like my daring father, Hercules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lion-hearted, who once came to Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To claim the coursers of Laomedon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With but six ships, and warriors but a few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laid the city waste and made its streets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A desolation. Thou art weak of heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round thee are thy people perishing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, even wert thou brave, thy presence here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Lycia’s coast would prove of small avail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Troy; for, slain in combat here by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou to the gates of Hades shalt go down.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sarpedon, leader of the Lycians, thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made answer: “True it is, Tlepolemus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he laid waste the sacred city of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the base dealings of Laomedon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The monarch who with railing words repaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His great deservings, and kept back the steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which he came so far. But thou⁠—thy fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is slaughter and black death from this my spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fame will come to me, and one more soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go down to Hades.” As Sarpedon spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tlepolemus upraised his ashen spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the hands of both the chiefs at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their massive weapons flew. Sarpedon smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full in the throat his foe; the cruel point</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed through the neck, and night came o’er his eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tlepolemus, in turn, on the left thigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had struck Sarpedon with his ponderous lance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon, cast with vigorous hand and arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierced deep, and touched the bone; but Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Averted from his son the doom of death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His noble comrades raised and bore away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great Sarpedon from the battle-field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trailing the long spear with them. Bitter pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It gave him; in their haste they marked it not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor thought to draw the ashen weapon forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he might mount the car; so eagerly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His anxious bearers hurried from the war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On the other side the well-armed Greeks took up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slain Tlepolemus, to bear him thence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great Ulysses, large of soul, beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And felt his spirit moved, as anxiously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He pondered whether to pursue the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove the Thunderer, or turn and take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life of many a Lycian. Yet to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove’s mighty son was not his destiny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore Pallas moved him to engage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crowd of Lycian warriors. Then he slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coeranus and Alastor, Chromius,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcander, Halius, and Prytanis</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noëmon; and yet more the noble Greek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had slain, if crested Hector, mighty chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not perceived the havoc and, arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shining armor, hurried to the van</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of battle, carrying terror to the hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Achaians. As he saw him near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sarpedon was rejoiced, yet sadly said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O son of Priam, leave me not a prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To these Achaians. Aid me, let me breathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My latest breath in Troy, since I no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can hope, returning to my native land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gladden my dear wife and little son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and crested Hector answered not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still pressing forward, eager to drive back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks in quick retreat, and take the life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many a foe. Then did the noble band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bore the great Sarpedon lay him down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath a shapely beech, a tree of Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Aegis-bearer. There stout Pelagon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His well-beloved comrade, from his thigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew forth the sharp blade of the ashen spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the breath left him, and his eyes were closed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In darkness; but the light came back again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, breathing over him, the fresh north wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revived the spirit in his laboring breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But not for Mars nor Hector mailed in brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fled the Achaians to their fleet; nor yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advanced they on the foe, but step by step</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave way before him, for they had perceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The god of war was with the sons of Troy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whom first, whom last did Hector, Priam’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And iron Mars lay low? The godlike chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teuthras, and⁠—great among the Grecian knights⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orestes, and the Aetolian Trechus, famed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As spearman, and Oenomaüs, and the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Oenops, Helemes, and after these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Belted Oresbius, who in Hyla made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His home, intent on gathering wealth beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lake Cephissus, on whose borders dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boeotians many, lords of fertile lands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The white-armed goddess Juno, when she saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Argives falling in that cruel fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Addressed Minerva with these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O thou unconquerable goddess, born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Jove the Aegis-bearer! what is this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was an idle promise that we made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Menelaus, that he should behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Troy, with its strong defences, overthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reach his home again, if thus we leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mars the destroyer to his ravages.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, let us bring our friends effectual aid.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, and her bidding was obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By blue-eyed Pallas. Juno the august,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughter of mighty Saturn, laid in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The harness, with its ornaments of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the horses. Hebe rolled the wheels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each with eight spokes, and joined them to the ends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the steel axle⁠—fellies wrought of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound with a brazen rim to last for aye⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wonder to behold. The hollow naves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were silver, and on gold and silver cords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was slung the chariot’s seat; in silver hooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rested the reins, and silver was the pole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the fair yoke and poitrels, all of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were fastened. Juno, eager for the strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led the swift-footed steeds beneath the yoke.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Pallas, daughter of the god who bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aegis, on her father’s palace-floor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let fall in dainty folds her flowing robe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many colors, wrought by her own hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, putting on the mail of Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cloud-compeller, stood arrayed in arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the stern tasks of war. Her shoulder bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dreadful aegis with its shaggy brim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bordered with Terror. There was Strife, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Fortitude, and there was fierce Pursuit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there the Gorgon’s head, a ghastly sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deformed and dreadful, and a sign of woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When borne by Jupiter. Upon her head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She placed a golden helmet with four crests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fair embossed, of strength that might withstand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The armèd battalions of a hundred towns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then stepped into her shining car, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her massive spear in hand, heavy and huge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With which whole ranks of heroes are o’erthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the daughter of the Mighty One</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Incensed against them. Juno swung the lash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swiftly urged the steeds. Before their way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On sounding hinges, of their own accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew wide the gates of heaven, which evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Hours are watching⁠—they who keep the mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Olympus and the mighty heaven, with power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To open or to close their cloudy veil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus through the gates they drave the obedient steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And found Saturnius, where he sat apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From other gods, upon the loftiest height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many-peaked Olympus. Juno there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white-armed goddess, stayed her chariot-wheels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, thus accosting Jove, she questioned him:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Father Jupiter, does not thy wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise at those violent deeds of Mars? Thou seest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many of the Achaians he has slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what brave men. Nay, thus it should not be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great grief is mine; but Venus and the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus, who bears the silver bow, rejoice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see this lawless maniac range the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And urge him on. O Father Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou be angry with me if I drive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mars, sorely wounded, from the battle-field?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The cloud-compelling Jupiter replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou hast my leave; but send to encounter him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pallas the spoiler, who has many a time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought grievous troubles on the god of war.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and white-armed Juno instantfy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obeyed him. With the scourge she lashed the steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not unwillingly they flew between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth and the starry heaven. As much of space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one who gazes on the dark-blue deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees from the headland summit where he sits⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such space the coursers of immortal breed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleared at each bound they made with sounding hoofs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when they came to Ilium and its streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Simoïs and Scamander’s channels meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white-armed goddess Juno stayed their speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loosed them from the yoke, and covered them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With darkness. Simoïs ministered, meanwhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ambrosial pasturage on which they fed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On went the goddesses, with step as light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As timid doves, and hastened toward the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid the Achaian army. When they came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where fought the bravest warriors in a throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the great horse-tamer Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like ravenous lions or wild boars whose rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is terrible, the white-armed goddess stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And called aloud⁠—for now she wore the form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gallant Stentor, in whose brazen voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was heard a shout like that of fifty men:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shame on you, Argives⁠—wretches, who in form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And form alone, are heroes. While we yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had great Achilles in the war, the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilium dared not pass beyond their gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So much they feared his mighty spear; but now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They push the battle to our hollow ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the town.” As thus the goddess spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New strength and courage woke in every breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then blue-eyed Pallas hastened to the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tydeus. By his steeds she found the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by his chariot, as he cooled the wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made by the shaft of Pandarus. The sweat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the ample band of his round shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had weakened him, and weary was his arm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He raised the band, and from the wounded limb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wiped off the clotted blood. The goddess laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her hand upon the chariot-yoke, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Tydeus hath left a son unlike himself;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he, though low in stature, was most brave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when he went, an envoy and alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thebes, the populous Cadmean town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I, enjoining him to keep aloof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From wars and rash encounters, bade him sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quietly at the feasts in palace-halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still, to his valiant temper true, he gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Challenges to the Theban youths, and won</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prize with ease in all their games, such aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I gave him. Now I stand by thee in turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protect thee, and exhort thee minfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fight against the Trojans; but to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Either the weariness of toil unnerves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy frame, or withering fear besets thy heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Henceforth we cannot deem thee, as of late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The offspring of Oenides skilled in war.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the valiant Diomed replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I know thee, goddess, daughter of great Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Aegis-bearer; therefore will I speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freely and keep back nothing. No base fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmans me, nor desire of ease; but well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I bear in mind the mandate thou hast given.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou didst forbid me to contend with gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except that if Jove’s daughter, Venus, joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle, I might wound her with my spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now I have withdrawn, and given command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the Greeks come hither; for I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Mars is in the field and leads the war.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again the blue-eyed Pallas, answering, said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tydides Diomed, most dear of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, fear thou nothing from this Mars, nor yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From any other of the gods; for I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be thy sure defence. First urge thy course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full against Mars, with thy firm-footed steeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Engage him hand to hand; respect him not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fiery, frantic Mars, the unnatural plague</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of man, the fickle god, who promised me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Juno, lately, to take part with us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the Trojans and befriend the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now he forgets, and joins the sons of Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and laid her hand on Sthenelus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To draw him from the horses; instantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He leaped to earth; the indignant deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took by the side of Diomed her place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beechen axle groaned beneath the weight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that great goddess and that man of might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Pallas seized the lash and caught the reins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, urging the firm-footed coursers, drave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full against Mars, who at that moment slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huge Periphas, the mightiest one of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Aetolian band⁠—Ochesius’ famous son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While bloody-handed Mars was busy yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the slain, Minerva hid her face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Pluto’s helmet, that the god might fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see her. As that curse of humankind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld the approach of noble Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He left the corpse of Periphas unspoiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where he had fallen, and where he breathed his last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came in haste to meet the Grecian knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, when they were near, and face to face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mars o’er the chariot-yoke and horses’ reins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First hurled his brazen spear, in hope to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His enemy’s life; but Pallas with her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught it and turned it, so that it flew by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave no wound. The valiant Diomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made with his brazen spear the next assault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas guided it to strike the waist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where girded by the baldric. In that part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wounded Mars, and tore the shining skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drew the weapon back. The furious god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uttered a cry as of nine thousand men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or of ten thousand, rushing to the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks and Trojans stood aghast with fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear that terrible cry of him whose thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bloodshed never is appeased by blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As when, in time of heat, the air is filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a black shadow from the gathering clouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the strong-blowing wind, so furious Mars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared to Diomed, as in a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rose to the broad heaven and to the home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gods on high Olympus. Near to Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took his seat in bitter grief, and showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The immortal blood still dropping from his wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus, with wingèd words, complaining said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Father Jupiter! does not thy wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise at these violent deeds? ’T is ever thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we, the gods, must suffer grievously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From our own rivalry in favoring man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet the blame of all this strife is thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou hast a mad daughter, ever wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever bent on mischief. All the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the immortals dwelling on this mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obey thee and are subject to thy will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her only thou hast never yet restrained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By word or act, but dost indulge her freaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the pestilent creature is thy child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now she moves the insolent Diomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To raise his hand against the immortal gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And first he wounded Venus in the wrist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contending hand to hand; and then he sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To encounter me in arms, as if he were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The equal of a god. My own swift feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried me thence, else might I long have lain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In anguish, under heaps of carcasses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or helplessly been mangled by his sword.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Cloud-compeller, Jove, replied, and frowned:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come not to me, thou changeling, to complain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the gods upon the Olympian mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I like thee least, who ever dost delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In broils and wars and battles. Thou art like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mother Juno, headstrong and perverse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her I can scarcely rule by strict commands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what thou sufferest now, I deem, is due</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her bad counsels. Yet ’t is not my will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou shouldst suffer longer, who dost share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My lineage, whom thy mother bore to me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But wert thou born, destroyer as thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To any other god, thou hadst long since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lain lower than the sons of Uranus.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, and to Paeon gave command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To heal the wound; and Paeon bathed the part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pain-dispelling balsams, and it healed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Mars was not to die. As, when the juice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of figs is mingled with white milk and stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The liquid gathers into clots while yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It whirls with the swift motion, so was healed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wound of violent Mars. Then Hebe bathed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The god, and robed him richly, and he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His seat, delighted, by Saturnian Jove.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now, having forced the curse of nations. Mars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pause from slaughter, Argive Juno came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Pallas, her invincible ally,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the mansion of imperial Jove.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
