<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book XXII: The Death of Hector</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-22" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Death of Hector</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Refusal of Hector to enter the city, though entreated by Priam and Hecuba⁠—His resolve to meet Achilles, and his flight when Achilles approaches⁠—Descent of Minerva to aid Achilles⁠—Deceit practised by her on Hector, when, assuming the form of his brother Deïphobus, she induces him to encounter Achilles⁠—His death⁠—His body dragged at the chariot-wheels of the victor⁠—Lament of Priam and Hecuba⁠—The news brought to Andromache while engaged at the loom⁠—Her sorrow and lamentation.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Thus were they driven within the city walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like frighted fawns, and there dispersing cooled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sweaty limbs, and quenched their eager thirst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rested on the battlements. The Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing their shields upon their shoulders, came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to the ramparts. Hector’s adverse fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Detained him still without the walls of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And near the Scaean gates. Meantime the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo to the son of Peleus said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O son of Peleus! Why pursue me thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy swift feet⁠—a mortal man in chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of an immortal? That I am a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou seest not yet, but turnest all thy rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On me, and, having put the host of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rout, dost think of them no more. They find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A refuge in their town, while far astray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wanderest hither. Thou hast not the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay me; I am not of mortal birth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The swift Achilles angrily replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O archer-god, thou most unjust of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The immortals! Thou hast wronged me, luring me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aside; since many a warrior I had forced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bite the dust before they reached the gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilium but for thee, who from my grasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast snatched the glory and hast rescued them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou didst not fear my vengeance; yet if power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were given me, I would punish thee for this.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and with heroic purpose turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward Ilium. As a steed that wins the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flies at his utmost speed across the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whirls along the chariot, with such speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Peleus moved his rapid feet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The aged monarch Priam was the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see him as he scoured the plain, and shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to the star which in the autumn time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rises and glows among the lights of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eminent lustre at the dead of night⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orion’s Hound they call it⁠—bright indeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet of baleful omen, for it brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distressing heat to miserable men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shone the brass upon the warrior’s breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on he flew. The aged Priam groaned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote his head with lifted hands, and called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloud, imploring his beloved son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who eagerly before the city gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waited his foe Achilles. Priam thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With outstretched hands, besought him piteously:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O wait not, Hector, my beloved son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat with Pelides, thus alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And far from succor, lest thou meet thy death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by his hand, for he is mightier far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than thou art. Would that he, the cruel one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were but as much the favorite of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he is mine! Then should the birds of prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dogs devour his carcass, and the grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That weighs upon my spirit would depart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have been robbed by him of many sons⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave youths, whom he has slain or sold as slaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In distant isles; and now I see no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among our host on whom the gates are closed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Polydorus and Lycaon, whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The peerless dame Laothoe bore to me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If yet they are within the Grecian camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will redeem their lives with brass and gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I have store, which Altes, the renowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aged, gave his daughter. If they live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer, but have passed to the abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hades, bitter will our sorrow be⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine and their mother’s⁠—but the popular grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will sooner be consoled if thou fall not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by Achilles. Come within the walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My son, that thou mayst still be the defence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilium’s sons and daughters, nor increase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glory of Pelides with the loss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thine own life. Have pity upon me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who only live to suffer⁠—whom the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Saturn, on the threshold of my age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath destined to endure a thousand griefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then to be destroyed⁠—to see my sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by the sword, my daughters dragged away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into captivity, their chambers made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spoil, our infants dashed against the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By cruel hands, the consorts of my sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne off by the ferocious Greeks; and last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perchance the very dogs which I have fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in my palaces and at my board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guardians of my doors, when, by the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sword, some enemy shall take my life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at my threshold leave me stretched a corpse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will rend me, and, with savage greediness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will lap my blood, and in the porch lie down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When one in prime of youth lies slain in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gashed with the spear, his wounds become him well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And honor him in all men’s eyes; but when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An aged man is slain, and his white head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his white beard and limbs are foully torn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By ravening dogs, there is no sadder sight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So the old monarch spake, and with his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tore his gray hair, but moved not Hector thus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came, with lamentations and in tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warrior’s mother forward. One hand laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her bosom bare; she pressed the other hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath it, sobbed, and spake these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Revere this bosom, Hector, and on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have pity. If when thou wert but a babe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ever on this bosom stilled thy cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think of it now, beloved child; avoid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That dreadful chief; withdraw within the walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor madly think to encounter him alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of my love and of my womb! If he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should slay thee, I shall not lament thy death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above thy bier⁠—I, nor thy noble wife⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But far from us the greedy dogs will throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mangle thee beside the Grecian fleet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus, weeping bitterly, the aged pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entreated their dear son, yet moved him not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood and waited for his mighty foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, as a serpent at his den,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fed on the poisons of the wild, awaits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The traveller, and, fierce with hate of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glaring fearfully, lies coiled within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So waited Hector with a resolute heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kept his ground, and, leaning his bright shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against a tower that jutted from the walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conferred with his great soul impatiently:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah me! If I should pass within the walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then will Polydamas be first to cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reproach upon me; for he counselled me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lead the Trojans back into the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fatal night which saw Achilles rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To join the war again. I yielded not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his advice; far better if I had.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, since my fatal stubbornness has brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This ruin on my people, I most dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The censure of the men and long-robed dames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilium. Men less brave than I will say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Foolhardy Hector in his pride has thrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His people’s lives away.’ So will they speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And better were it for me to return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles slain, or, slain myself by him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To perish for my country gloriously.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But should I lay aside this bossy shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this stout helm, and lean against the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This spear, and go to meet the gallant son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus, with a promise to restore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helen and all the treasure brought with her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Troy by Paris, in his roomy ships⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that the war was waged for⁠—that the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus may convey it hence, besides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wealth drawn from all the hoards within the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to be shared among the Greeks; for I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would bind the Trojans by a solemn oath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep back nothing, but divide the whole⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whate’er of riches this fair town contains⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into two parts⁠—But why should I waste thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On plans like these? I must not act the part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of suppliant to a man who may not show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regard or mercy, but may hew me down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defenceless, with my armor laid aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if I were a woman. Not with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May I hold parley from a tree or rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As youths and maidens with each other hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light converse. Better ’twere to rush at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat, and the sooner learn to whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Olympian Jove decrees the victory.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such were his thoughts. Achilles now drew near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like crested Mars, the warrior-god, he came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his right shoulder quivered fearfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Pelian ash, and from his burnished mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There streamed a light as of a blazing fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or of the rising sun. When Hector saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He trembled, nor could venture to remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But left the gates and fled away in fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides, trusting to his rapid feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursued him. As, among the mountain wilds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A falcon, fleetest of the birds of air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darts toward a timid dove that wheels away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shun him by a sidelong flight, while he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Springs after her again and yet again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And screaming follows, certain of his prey⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus onward flew Achilles, while as fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fled Hector in dismay, with hurrying feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the wall. They passed the Mount of View,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wind-beaten fig-tree, and they ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the public way by which the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was skirted, till they came where from the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The two fair springs of eddying Xanthus rise⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One pouring a warm stream from which ascends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spreads a vapor like a smoke from fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other, even in summer, sending forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A current cold as hail, or snow, or ice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there were broad stone basins, fairly wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At which, in time of peace, before the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had landed on the plain, the Trojan dames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their fair daughters washed their sumptuous robes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past these they swept; one fled, and one pursued⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A brave man fled, a braver followed close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swiftly both. Not for a common prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A victim from the herd, a bullock’s hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as reward the fleet of foot, they ran⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The race was for the knightly Hector’s life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As firm-paced coursers, that are wont to win,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fly toward the goal, when some magnificent prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tripod or a damsel, is proposed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In honor of some hero’s obsequies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So these flew thrice on rapid feet around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city of Priam. All the gods of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked on, and thus the Almighty Father spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alas! I see a hero dear to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursued around the wall. My heart is grieved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Hector, who has brought so many thighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bullocks to my altar on the side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ida ploughed with glens, or on the heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilium. The renowned Achilles now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is chasing him with rapid feet around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city of Priam. Now bethink yourselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And answer. Shall we rescue him from death?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or shall we doom him, valiant as he is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To perish by the hand of Peleus’ son?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Minerva, blue-eyed goddess, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Father, who dost hurl the thunderbolt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hide the sky in clouds, what hast thou said?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst thou reprieve from death a mortal man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose doom is fixed? Then do it; but know this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the other gods will not approve.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake again the Cloud-compeller Jove:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tritonia, my dear child, be calm. I spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of no design. I would be kind to thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do as thou wilt, and be there no delay.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and Pallas from the Olympian peaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encouraged by his words in what her thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had planned already, downward shot to earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still, with quick steps, the fleet Achilles pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Hector’s flight. As when a hound has roused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fawn from its retreat among the hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chases it through glen and forest ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to close thickets, where it skulks in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until he overtake it, Hector thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought vainly to elude the fleet pursuit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus’ son. As often as he thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By springing toward the gates of Troy, to gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aid from the weapons of his friends who stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the tall towers, so often was the Greek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him, forcing him to turn away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ilium toward the plain. Achilles thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept nearest to the city. As in dreams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fleet pursuer cannot overtake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the pursued escape, so was it now;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One followed but in vain, the other fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As fruitlessly. But how could Hector thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have put aside the imminent doom of death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not Apollo met him once again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the last time, and given him strength and speed?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The great Achilles nodded to his host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sign that no man should presume to strike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Hector with his weapon, lest perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another, wounding him, should bear away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glory, and Pelides only wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The second honors. When the twain had come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the fourth time beside Scamander’s springs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The All-Father raised the golden balance high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, placing in the scales two lots which bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death’s long dark sleep⁠—one lot for Peleus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one for knightly Hector⁠—by the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He poised the balance. Hector’s fate sank down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hades, and Apollo left the field.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The blue-eyed goddess Pallas then approached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Peleus with these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Renowned Achilles, dear to Jupiter!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now may we, as I hope, at last return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Achaian army and the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With glory, Hector slain, the terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In war. Escape he cannot, even though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The archer-god Apollo fling himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With passionate entreaty at the feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove the Aegis-bearer. Stay thou here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And breathe a moment, while I go to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lure him hither to encounter thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and he obeyed, and gladly stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Propped on the ashen stem of his keen spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, passing on, Minerva overtook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble Hector. In the outward form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the strong voice of Deïphobus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stood by him and spake these wingèd words:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hard pressed I find thee, brother, by the swift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, who, with feet that never rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursues thee round the walls of Priam’s town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let us make a stand and beat him back.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the crested Hector spake in turn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Deïphobus, thou ever hast been dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me beyond my other brethren, sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hecuba and Priam. Now still more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I honor thee, since thou hast seen my plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for my sake hast ventured forth without</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gates, while all the rest remain within.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the blue-eyed Pallas spake again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Brother! ’tis true, my father, and the queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother, and my comrades, clasped my knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turn, and earnestly entreated me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I would not go forth, such fear had fallen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On all of them; but I was grieved for thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let us combat valiantly, nor spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapons that we bear, and we shall learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether Achilles, having slain us both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will carry to the fleet our bloody spoil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or die himself, the victim of thy spear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The treacherous goddess spake, and led the way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the advancing chiefs stood face to face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crested hero, Hector, thus began:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No longer I avoid thee as of late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O son of Peleus! Thrice around the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam’s mighty city have I fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor dared to wait thy coming. Now my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bids me encounter thee; my time is come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay or to be slain. Now let us call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods to witness, who attest and guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The covenants of men. Should Jove bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On me the victory, and I take thy life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt meet no dishonor at my hands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, stripping off the armor, I will send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks thy body. Do the like by me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The swift Achilles answered with a frown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Accursed Hector, never talk to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of covenants. Men and lions plight no faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor wolves agree with lambs, but each must plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evil against the other. So between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thyself and me no compact can exist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or understood intent. First, one of us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must fall and yield his life-blood to the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of battles. Summon all thy valor now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A skilful spearman thou hast need to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a bold warrior. There is no escape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now doth Pallas doom thee to be slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By my good spear. Thou shalt repay to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The evil thou hast done my countrymen⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My friends whom thou hast slaughtered in thy rage.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, brandishing his massive spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurled it at Hector, who beheld its aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From where he stood. He stooped, and over him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brazen weapon passed, and plunged to earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unseen by royal Hector, Pallas went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plucked it from the ground, and brought it back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave it to the hands of Peleus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Hector said to his illustrious foe:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Godlike Achilles, thou hast missed thy mark;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor hast thou learned my doom from Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou pretendest. Thou art glib of tongue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cunningly thou orderest thy speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hope that I who hear thee may forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My might and valor. Think not I shall flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou mayst pierce my back; for thou shalt send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy spear, if God permit thee, through my breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I rush on thee. Now avoid in turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My brazen weapon. Would that it might pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clean through thee, all its length! The tasks of war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For us of Troy were lighter for thy death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou pest and deadly foe of all our race!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and brandishing his massive spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurled it, nor missed, but in the centre smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The buckler of Pelides. Far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It bounded from the brass, and he was vexed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see that the swift weapon from his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had flown in vain. He stood perplexed and sad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No second spear had he. He called aloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the white-bucklered chief, Deïphobus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring another; but that chief was far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hector saw that it was so, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah me! The gods have summoned me to die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought my warrior-friend, Deïphobus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was by my side; but he is still in Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas has deceived me. Now my death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot be far⁠—is near; there is no hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my escape, for so it pleases Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Jove’s great archer-son, who have till now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delivered me. My hour at last is come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not ingloriously or passively</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I die, but first will do some valiant deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which mankind shall hear in after time.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and drew the keen-edged sword that hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Massive and finely tempered, at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sprang⁠—as when an eagle high in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the thick cloud, darts downward to the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To clutch some tender lamb or timid hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Hector, brandishing that keen-edged sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang forward, while Achilles opposite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaped toward him, all on fire with savage hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And holding his bright buckler, nobly wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him. On his shining helmet waved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fourfold crest; there tossed the golden tufts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With which the hand of Vulcan lavishly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had decked it. As in the still hours of night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hesper goes forth among the host of stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fairest light of heaven, so brightly shone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brandished in the right hand of Peleus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear’s keen blade, as, confident to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble Hector, o’er his glorious form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His quick eye ran, exploring where to plant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The surest wound. The glittering mail of brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Won from the slain Patroclus guarded well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each part, save only where the collar-bones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Divide the shoulder from the neck, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared the throat, the spot where life is most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In peril. Through that part the noble son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus drave his spear; it went quite through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tender neck, and yet the brazen blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleft not the windpipe, and the power to speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remained. The Trojan fell amid the dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus Achilles boasted o’er his fall:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hector, when from the slain Patroclus thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst strip his armor, little didst thou think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of danger. Thou hadst then no fear of me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who was not near thee to avenge his death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fool! There was left within the roomy ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mightier one than he, who should come forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The avenger of his blood, to take thy life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foul dogs and birds of prey shall tear thy flesh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks shall honor him with funeral rites.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the crested Hector faintly said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I pray thee by thy life, and by thy knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by thy parents, suffer not the dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tear me at the galleys of the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accept abundant store of brass and gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which gladly will my father and the queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother, give in ransom. Send to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My body, that the warriors and the dames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy may light for me the funeral pile.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The swift Achilles answered with a frown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, by my knees entreat me not, thou cur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor by my parents. I could even wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fury prompted me to cut thy flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fragments, and devour it, such the wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I have had from thee. There will be none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive away the dogs about thy head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not though thy Trojan friends should bring to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tenfold and twenty-fold the offered gifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And promise others⁠—not though Priam, sprung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Dardanus, should send thy weight in gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mother shall not lay thee on thy bier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sorrow over thee whom she brought forth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But dogs and birds of prey shall mangle thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the crested Hector, dying, said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I know thee, and too clearly I foresaw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should not move thee, for thou hast a heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of iron. Yet reflect that for my sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The anger of the gods may fall on thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Paris and Apollo strike thee down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong as thou art, before the Scaean gates.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Hector spake, and straightway o’er him closed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The night of death; the soul forsook his limbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flew to Hades, grieving for its fate⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So soon divorced from youth and youthful might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then said the great Achilles to the dead:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Die thou; and I, whenever it shall please</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove and the other gods, will meet my fate.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, plucking forth his brazen lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laid it by, and from the body stripped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bloody mail. The thronging Greeks beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wonder Hector’s tall and stately form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no one came who did not add a wound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, looking to each other, thus they said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How much more tamely Hector now endures</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our touch than when he set the fleet on fire!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such were the words of those who smote the dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, when swift Achilles from the corpse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had stripped the armor, he stood forth among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaian host, and spake these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Leaders and princes of the Grecian host!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since we, my friends, by favor of the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have overcome the chief who wrought more harm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To us than all the rest, let us assault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The town, and learn what they of Troy intend⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether their troops will leave the citadel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since he is slain, or hold it with strong hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Hector is no more. But why give thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To plans like these while yet Patroclus lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A corse unwept, unburied, at the fleet?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never will forget him while I live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while these limbs have motion. Though below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Hades they forget the dead, yet I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will there remember my beloved friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now then, ye youths of Greece, move on and chant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A paean, while, returning to the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We bring great glory with us; we have slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble Hector, whom, throughout their town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans ever worshipped like a god.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, planning in his mind to treat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble Hector shamefully, he bored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sinews of his feet between the heel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ankle; drawing through them leathern thongs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bound them to the car, but left the head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To trail in dust. And then he climbed the car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took in the shining mail, and lashed to speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coursers. Not unwillingly they flew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the dead, as he was dragged along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dust arose; his dark locks swept the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That head, of late so noble in men’s eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay deep amid the dust, for Jove that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suffered the foes of Hector to insult</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His corse in his own land. His mother saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tore her hair, and flung her lustrous veil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away, and uttered piercing shrieks. No less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father, who so loved him, piteously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bewailed him; and in all the streets of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people wept aloud, with such lament</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the towery Ilium were in flames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to its loftiest roofs. They scarce could keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged king within, who, wild with grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struggled to rush through the Dardanian gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, rolling in the dust, entreated all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stood around him, calling them by name:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Refrain, my friends, though kind be your intent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me go forth alone, and at the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greece will I entreat this man of blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And violence. He may perchance be moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With reverence for my age, and pity me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my gray hairs; for such a one as I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is Peleus, his own father, by whose care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Greek was reared to be a scourge to Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, more than all, a cause of grief to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many sons of mine in life’s fresh prime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have fallen by his hand. I mourn for them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not with such keen anguish as I mourn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Hector. Sorrow for his death will bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul to Hades. Would that he had died</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in my arms! This solace had been ours⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His most unhappy mother and myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had stooped to shed these tears upon his bier.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and wept, and all the citizens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept with him. Hecuba among the dames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took up the lamentation, and began:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why do I live, my son, when thou art dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I so wretched?⁠—thou who wert my boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever, by night and day, where’er I went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whom the Trojan men and matrons called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their bulwark, honoring thee as if thou wert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A god. They glory in thy might no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since Fate and Death have overtaken thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Weeping she spake. Meantime Andromache</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had heard no tidings of her husband yet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No messenger had even come to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he was still without the gates. She sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a recess of those magnificent halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wove a twofold web of brilliant hues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which were scattered flowers of rare device;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she had given her bright-haired maidens charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To place an ample caldron on the fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Hector, coming from the battle-field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might find the warm bath ready. Thoughtless one!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She knew not that the blue-eyed archer-queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the bath prepared for him, had slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her husband by the hand of Peleus’ son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She heard the shrieks, the wail upon the tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trembled in every limb, and quickly dropped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shuttle, saying to her bright-haired maids:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Come with me, two of you, that I may learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What now has happened. ’Tis my mother’s voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I have heard. My heart leaps to my mouth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My limbs fail under me. Some deadly harm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hangs over Priam’s sons; far be the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I shall hear of it. And yet I fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest that Achilles, having got between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daring Hector and the city gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May drive him to the plain alone, and quell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The desperate valor that was ever his;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For never would he keep the ranks, but ranged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond them, and gave way to no man’s might.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and from the royal mansion rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distractedly, and with a beating heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her maids went with her. When she reached the tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And throng of men, and, standing on the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked forth, she saw her husband dragged away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the city. Toward the Grecian fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift steeds drew him. Sudden darkness came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over her eyes, and in a breathless swoon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sank away and fell. The ornaments</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dropped from her brow⁠—the wreath, the woven band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The net, the veil which golden Venus gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That day when crested Hector wedded her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dowered with large gifts, and led her from her home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eëtion’s palace. Round her in a throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her sisters of the house of Priam pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gently raised her in that deathlike swoon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when she breathed again, and to its seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The conscious mind returned, as in their arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She lay, with sobs and broken speech she said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hector⁠—O wretched me!⁠—we both were born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sorrow; thou at Troy, in Priam’s house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I at Thebé in Eëtion’s halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By woody Placos. From a little child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He reared me there⁠—unhappy he, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhappy! O that I had ne’er been born!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou goest down to Hades and the depths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of earth, and leavest me in thine abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Widowed, and never to be comforted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy son, a speechless babe, to whom we two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave being⁠—hapless parents!⁠—cannot have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy loving guardianship now thou art dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor be a joy to thee. Though he survive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cruel warfare which the sons of Greece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are waging, hard and evil yet will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lot hereafter; others will remove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His landmarks and will make his fields their own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The day in which a boy is fatherless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes him companionless; with downcast eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wanders, and his cheeks are stained with tears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfed he goes where sit his father’s friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plucks one by the cloak, and by the robe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another. One who pities him shall give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A scanty draught, which only wets his lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not his palate; while another boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose parents both are living, thrusts him thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blows and vulgar clamor: ‘Get thee gone!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy father is not with us at the feast.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then to his widowed mother shall return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Astyanax in tears, who not long since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was fed, while sitting in his father’s lap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On marrow and the delicate fat of lambs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever when his childish sports had tired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boy, and sleep came stealing over him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slumbered, softly cushioned, on a couch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his nurse’s arms, his heart at ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And satiate with delights. But now thy son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Astyanax⁠—whom so the Trojans name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because thy valor guarded gate and tower⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy care withdrawn, shall suffer many things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While far from those who gave thee birth, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roomy ships of Greece, the restless worms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall make thy flesh their banquet when the dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have gorged themselves. Thy garments yet remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the palace, delicately wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And graceful, woven by the women’s hands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these, since thou shalt put them on no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor wear them in thy death, I burn with fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the Trojan men and dames; and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall see how gloriously thou wert arrayed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Weeping she spake, and with her wept her maid.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
