<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 9: The Embassy to Achilles</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Embassy to Achilles</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Agamemnon’s Proposal to raise the siege opposed by Diomed and Nestor⁠—A council⁠—Ulysses, Ajax, and Phoenix sent to Achilles to request a reconciliation⁠—Their reception, their persuasions, and their ill success.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>The Trojans thus kept watch; while through the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The power of Flight, companion of cold Fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought on the Greeks, and all their bravest men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were bowed beneath a sorrow hard to bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when two winds upturn the fishy deep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The north wind and the west, that suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow from the Thracian coast; the black waves rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once, and fling the sea-weed to the shore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus were the Achaians troubled in their hearts.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Atrides, deeply grieving, walked the camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade the clear-voiced heralds call by name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To council all the chiefs, but not aloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king himself among the foremost gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The summons. Sadly that assembly took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their seats; and Agamemnon in the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose, shedding tears⁠—as down a lofty rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkening its face, a fountain’s waters flow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, deeply sighing, thus addressed the Greeks:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends! the chiefs and princes of the Greeks!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saturnian Jove hath in an evil snare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most cruelly entangled me. He gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His promise once that I should overthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This strong-walled Ilium, and return; but now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He meditates a fraud, and sends me back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Argos without glory, and with loss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many warriors. Thus doth it seem good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doubtless to Jove Almighty, who hath cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The towers of many a city down to earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will cast others down⁠—his might excels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All other might. But let us now obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I shall counsel you, and in our ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste to our own dear country; for I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Troy with its broad streets can ne’er be ours.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and all were silent. Silent long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remained the sorrow-stricken sons of Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Diomed, the brave in battle, spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“First of the chiefs I speak, to disapprove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides, thy rash purpose: ’tis my right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council; nor, O king, be thou displeased.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou first among the Greeks hast taunted me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lack of valor, calling me unapt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For war and weak of arm. The young and old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have heard the taunt. One of two gifts the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wily Saturn hath bestowed on thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High rank and rule o’er all the rest he gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But gave thee not the nobler quality</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fortitude. Dost thou then truly deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks unapt for war and weak of arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou hast said? Thou longest to return:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, then; the way is open; by the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The barques that brought thee from Mycenae lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A numerous fleet. Yet others will remain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long haired Achaians⁠—till we overthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city. Should they also pine for home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let them flee, with all their ships; while I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Sthenelus fight on until we make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An end of Troy⁠—for with the gods we came.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. The Greeks applauded; all admired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The words of the horse-tamer Diomed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nestor the knight then rose, and thus he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O son of Tydeus, eminently brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou among thy comrades in the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And great in council. No one here condemns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sentence thou hast given; among the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is no one who denies what thou hast said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet hast thou not said all. Thy years are few⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So few, thou mightest be my youngest son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet thou speakest wisely to the kings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greece, and thy discourse is just and right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I, who boast of far more years than thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will speak of this that yet remains, and none⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even Agamemnon⁠—will gainsay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I advise. A wretch without a tie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of kin, a lawless man without a home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is he who takes delight in civil strifes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let us now give way to the dark night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make our banquets ready. Let the guards</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lie down within the trenches which we digged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the wall: be this the young men’s charge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, Atrides, do thou now begin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who art supreme, and make a feast for all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The elder chiefs; it shall become thee well:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy tents are full of wine, which ships from Thrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring every day across the mighty deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou hast all things ready, and a host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of menials. Then, when many throng the board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt defer to him who counsels thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most wisely; for the Greeks have urgent need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of prudent counsels, when the foe so close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside our galleys lights his multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of watch-fires. Who that sees them can rejoice?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This night will rescue or destroy our host.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. They listened all, and willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obeyed him. Forth in armor went the guards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led by the chieftain Thrasymedes, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Nestor, by Ascalaphus, who claimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His birth from Mars, and by Ialmenus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother, and Deipyrus, with whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There followed Aphareus, Meriones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lycomedes, Creon’s noble son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven were the leaders of the guards; with each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred youths in warlike order marched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing long spears; and when they reached the space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the trench and wall they sat them down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kindled fires and made their evening meal.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Atrides brought the assembled elder chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his pavilion, and before them set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A generous banquet. They put forth their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shared the feast; and when the calls of thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hunger ceased, the aged Nestor first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to counsel them; the chief, whose words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had lately seemed of wisest import, now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Addressed the assembly with well-ordered speech:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Atrides Agamemnon, glorious king!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I shall say begins and ends with thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou dost rule o’er many nations. Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath given to thee the sceptre, and the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make their laws, that thou mayst seek their good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, therefore, of all men, shouldst speak and hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council, and shouldst follow willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another’s judgment when it best promotes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The general weal; for all depends on thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let me say what seems to me most wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For better counsel none can give than this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which now I meditate, and which to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I purposed from the hour when thou, great king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst bear the maid Briseis from the tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the enraged Achilles, unapproved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By me, who strove to change thy rash design.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then didst thou yield thee to thy haughty will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And didst dishonor a most valiant man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom the immortals honor. Thou didst take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still dost keep the prize he fairly won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let it be now our study to appease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero with large gifts and soothing words.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Agamemnon, king of men, replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O ancient man, most truly hast thou named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My faults. I erred, and I deny it not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That man indeed is equal to a host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Jupiter doth love and honor thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Humbling the Achaian people for his sake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, since, yielding to my wayward mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I erred, let me appease him, if I may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gifts of priceless worth. Before you all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I number them⁠—seven tripods which the fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath never touched, six talents of pure gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And twenty shining caldrons, and twelve steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hardy frame, victorious in the race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose feet have won me prizes in the games.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No beggar would he be, nor yet with store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold unfurnished, in whose coffers lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prizes those swift steeds have brought to me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven faultless women, skilled in household arts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I give moreover⁠—Lesbians, whom I chose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he o’erran the populous Lesbian isle⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Damsels in beauty who excel their sex.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These I bestow, and with them I will send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her whom I took away⁠—Briseis, pure⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I swear it with a mighty oath⁠—as pure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when she left his tent. All these I give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once; and if by favor of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We lay the mighty city of Priam waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shall load down his galley with large store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold and silver, entering first when we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks, divide the spoil. Then may he choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twice ten young Trojan women, beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond their sex save Helen. If we come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe to Achaian Argos, richly stocked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With milky kine, he may become to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A son-in-law, and cherished equally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my sole son Orestes, who is reared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most royally. Three daughters there, within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My stately palace-walls⁠—Chrysothemis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laodice, and Iphianassa⁠—dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he may choose among them, and may lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home to the house of Peleus her who best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deserves his love. Nor need he to endow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bride, for I will give an ampler dower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than ever father to his daughter gave⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven cities with thronged streets⁠—Cardamyle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enope, grassy Hira, Pherae famed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afar, Antheia with rich pasture-fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aepeia beautiful, and Pedasus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all its vineyards; all are near the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stand the last before you reach the coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sandy Pylos. Rich in flocks and herds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their dwellers are, and they will honor him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if he were a god, and, ruled by him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will pay large tribute. These will I bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let but his anger cool and his resolve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give way. ’Tis Pluto who is deaf to prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ne’er relents, and he, of all the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most hateful is to men. Now let the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus yield at length to me, who stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above him in authority and years.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then answered Nestor the Gerenian knight:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Atrides Agamemnon! Glorious king!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gifts not to be contemned thou offerest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Prince Achilles. Let us now despatch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A chosen embassy, who shall proceed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once to where Pelides holds his tent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I name the men; and cheerfully will they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perform the duty: Phoenix, dear to Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be their leader, mighty Ajax next,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then high-born Ulysses; heralds twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall follow⁠—Hodius and Eurybates.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now be water brought to cleanse our hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And charge be given that no ill-omened word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be uttered, while we pray that Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Saturn, will assist our need.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and all approved the words he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then poured the heralds water on the hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those who sat. The young men crowned with wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goblets, and in seemly order passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brimming cups, distributing to each.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part to the gods they poured, and next they drank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As each might choose, and then the embassy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened from Agamemnon’s tent. To each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gerenian Nestor spake in turn, and fixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes on each intently⁠—most of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Ulysses⁠—and with many a charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To turn Pelides from his angry mood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the edge of the resounding deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They went, and as they walked they offered prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To earth-embracing Neptune, that their words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might move the great soul of Aeacides.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now they came where lay the Myrmidons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among their tents and ships. Achilles there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew solace from the music of a harp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet-toned and shapely, in a silver frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part of the spoil he took when he o’erthrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eëtion’s town. To soothe his mood he sang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deeds of heroes. By him sat alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus, silent till the song should cease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On moved the messengers⁠—before them walked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-born Ulysses⁠—till they stood beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles. He beheld, and with the harp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang from his seat, surprised. Patroclus saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heroes also, and arose. Their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift Achilles took in his, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Welcome! Ye come as friends. Some pressing cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must surely bring you hither, whom I prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wronged as I am, beyond all other Greeks.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus speaking, the great son of Peleus led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His guests still farther on, and seated them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On couches spread with purple coverings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus addressed Patroclus, who was near:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son of Menoetius, bring a larger vase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mingle purer wine, and place a cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For each, since these are most beloved friends⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These warriors who now sit beneath my roof.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. Patroclus hearkened, and obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His well-beloved friend, who meantime placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A block beside the fire, and on it laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chines of a sheep and of a fatling goat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of a sow, the fattest of her kind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Automedon stood by and held them fast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles took the knife and skilfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carved them in portions, and transfixed the parts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With spits. Patroclus, the divine in form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woke to a blaze the fire; and when the flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had ceased to rise he raked the glowing coals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart, and o’er them stretched the spits, and strewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raising the flesh, the sacred salt o’er all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when he had made ready and had spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The banquet on the board, Patroclus took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bread and offered it to all the guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shapely canisters. Achilles served</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The meats, and took his seat against the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In front of great Ulysses. There he bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friend Patroclus offer sacrifice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Casting the first rich morsels to the flames.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guests put forth their hands and shared the feast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the calls of hunger and of thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were felt no longer, Ajax gave a nod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Phoenix, which divine Ulysses saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And filled his cup and drank to Peleus’ son:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thy health, Achilles! Princely feasts like this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attend us both in Agamemnon’s tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here⁠—for here is all that makes a feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Complete; yet now is not the time to think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pleasant banquets, for our thoughts are turned⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Jove-born warrior!⁠—to a fearful time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of slaughter, and the fate of our good ships⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether we save them harmless, or the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Destroy them, if thou put not on thy might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now the haughty Trojans, and the troops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who come from far to aid them, pitch their camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to our fleet and wall, and all around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindle their many fires, and boast that we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer have the power to drive them back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From our black galleys. Jupiter, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Saturn, shows them favorable signs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lightnings from above; and, terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In aspect and in valor, Hector makes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad havoc, trusting in the aid of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And neither reverences gods nor men⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such rage possesses him. He prays that soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The morn may rise, that he may hew the prows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all our ships and give them to the flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slay the Greeks, bewildered with the smoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For me, I greatly fear the gods will grant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he fulfil his threat, and that our doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be to perish on the Trojan coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And far away from Argos, famed for steeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise, then, though late⁠—rise with a resolute mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the hard-pressed sons of Greece drive back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assailing Trojans. Thou wilt else lament</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter, when the evil shall be done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shall admit no cure. Bethink thee well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How from the Greeks thou mayst avert the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their destruction. O my friend, when first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sent thee forth to Agamemnon’s help</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Phthia’s coast, thy father Peleus said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘My child, from Juno and Minerva comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gift of valor, if they choose to give.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But curb thou the high spirit in thy breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For gentle ways are best, and keep aloof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From sharp contentions, that the old and young</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Greeks may honor thee the more.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Such was the old man’s charge, forgotten now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield, then, and lay thy wrath aside. Large gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth Agamemnon offer, to appease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy wounded spirit. Hear me, if thou wilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recount what gifts the monarch in his tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath promised thee:⁠—Seven tripods which the fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath never touched; six talents of pure gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And twenty shining caldrons; and twelve steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hardy frame, victorious in the race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose feet have won him prizes in the games.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No beggar would he be, nor yet with store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold unfurnished, in whose coffers lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prizes those swift-footed steeds have won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven faultless women, skilled in household arts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He offers⁠—Lesbians, whom he chose when thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst overrun the populous Lesbian isle⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In beauty eminent among their sex.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These he bestows, and with them he will send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her whom he took away⁠—Briseis, pure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He swears it with a mighty oath⁠—as pure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when she left thy tent. All these he gives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once; and if, by favor of the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We lay the mighty city of Priam waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt load down thy galley with large store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold and silver, entering first when we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks, divide the spoil. Then mayst thou choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twice ten young Trojan women, beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond their sex save Helen. If we come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe to Achaian Argos, richly stocked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With milky kine, thou mayst become to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A son-in-law, and cherished equally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his sole son Orestes, who is reared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right royally. Three daughters there, within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The monarch’s stately halls⁠—Chrysothemis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laodice, and Iphianassa⁠—dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou mayst choose among them, and mayst lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home to the house of Peleus her who best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deserves thy love. Nor needest thou endow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bride, for he will give an ampler dower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than ever father to his daughter gave⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven cities with thronged streets⁠—Cardamyle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enope, grassy Hira, Pherae famed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afar, Antheia with rich pasture-grounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aepeia beautiful, and Pedasus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all its vineyards; all are near the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stand the last before you reach the coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sandy Pylos. Rich in flocks and herds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their dwellers are, and they will honor thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if thou wert a god, and, ruled by thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will pay large tribute. These will he bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let but thine anger cease. But if the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus and his gifts still move thy hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At least have pity on the afflicted Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pent in their camp, who now would honor thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if thou wert a god; and thou shalt gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great glory as their champion, and shalt slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Hector, who even now is close at hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a murderous frenzy makes his boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That none of all the chieftains whom the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greece brought hither equals him in might.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The swift Achilles answered him and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Son of Laertes, nobly born, and versed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wise devices, let me frankly speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as I think, and just as I shall act,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then ye will not importune me more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hateful to me, as are the gates of hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is he who, hiding one thing in his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Utters another. I shall speak as seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me the best; nor deem I that the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus or the other Greeks can move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My settled purpose, since no thanks are paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him who with the enemy maintains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A constant battle: equal is the meed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him who stands aloof and him who fights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Manfully; both the coward and the brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are held in equal honor, and they die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An equal death⁠—the idler and the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mighty deeds. For me there is no store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wealth laid up from all that I have borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exposing life in battle. As a bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brings to her unfledged young the food she finds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though she herself be fasting, so have I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had many a night unvisited by sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And passed in combat many a bloody day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fighting beside these warriors for their wives.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve cities have I with my fleet laid waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with my Myrmidons have I o’erthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eleven upon this fertile Trojan coast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a precious spoil from these I bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to Atrides Agamemnon gave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, loitering in his fleet, received them all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Few he distributed, and many kept.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To chiefs and princes he indeed assigned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prizes, which now they hold. From me alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the Greeks he takes my prize; he takes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My bride, whom well I loved;⁠—and let him keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The damsel. But what need is there that Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wage war against the Trojans? For what cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Agamemnon, gathering from our realms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An army, lead it hither? Was it not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because of fair-haired Helen? Are the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus, then, the only men on earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who love their wives? Nay, every good man loves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cherishes his spouse; and mine I loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tenderly, though the captive of my spear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, since he hath taken my reward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away and treacherously dealt with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him not try again, for I am warned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he will not persuade me. Let him take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Counsel with thee, Ulysses, and the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to drive back the enemy and save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fleet from flames. Already has he done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much without me; a rampart he has raised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round it dug a deep, broad trench, and filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trench with palisades. Yet can he not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resist the man-destroyer Hector thus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Hector, when I fought among the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never would fight at distance from the walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ventured not beyond the Scaean gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beechen tree. There waited he for me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a time, and scarce escaped with life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my assault. Now, since I do not choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fight with noble Hector, I shall pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tomorrow, sacrifice to Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the gods, and load my galleys well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And draw them to the water. Then shalt thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See⁠—if thou care for such a sight⁠—my ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sailing upon the fishy Hellespont</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At early morning, with their crews on board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eager to pull the oar; and if the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ocean grant a prosperous voyage, then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the third day we reach the fertile coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phthia. Large possessions left I there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I came hither in an evil hour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thither I shall carry with me gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ruddy brass, and women of fair forms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And burnished steel⁠—the spoils I won in war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prize he gave me, Agamemnon, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus, takes, with many insults, back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear him this message⁠—give it openly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That others of the Greeks may be like me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indignant should he impudently dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wrong them also:⁠—Let him ne’er again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though shameless, dare to look me in the face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not join in council or in act</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With him: he has deceived and wronged me once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he cannot wheedle me with words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let once suffice. I leave him to himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To perish. All-providing Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath made him mad. I hate his gifts; I hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In utter scorn the giver. Were his gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tenfold⁠—nay, twenty-fold⁠—the worth of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he possesses, and with added wealth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From others⁠—all the riches that flow in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Orchomenus, or Thebes, the pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Egypt, where large treasures are laid up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through whose hundred gates rush men and steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two hundred through each gate;⁠—nay, should he give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As many gifts as there are sands and dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of earth⁠—not even then shall Atreus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Persuade me, till I reap a just revenge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his foul contumelies. I will wed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No child of Agamemnon. Even though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She vied with golden Venus in her charms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the blue-eyed Pallas in her skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would not wed her. Let him choose among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks a fitter husband⁠—one whose rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is wider than my own. For if the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Preserve me, and I reach my home again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father, Peleus, will bestow on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A consort. Many are the Achaian maids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughters of chiefs who hold our citadels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Hellas, and in Phthia, and of these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her who shall most delight me I will make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My well-beloved wife. My soul has longed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earnestly, with a fitting spouse betrothed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Duly, to make my dwelling there, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enjoy the wealth which aged Peleus won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For not to be compared with life is all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wealth which, as men say, was treasured up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Ilium’s populous town in time of peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the Greeks came, nor all the stores contained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the stony threshold of the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bears the bow, Apollo, on the coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rocky Pytho. We may gather spoil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of oxen and of fatling sheep, and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tripods from war, and yellow-manèd steeds:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The breath of man no force can seize or hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when it leaves the enclosure of the teeth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It comes not back. My mother said to me⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goddess, silver-footed Thetis, said⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A twofold fate conducts me to my death;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I remain to fight beneath the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilium, my return will be cut off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But deathless my renown; if I return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dear land in which my fathers dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My glory will be nought, but long my life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And late will come to me the stroke of death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I counsel all to sail for home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For never will ye see the overthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lofty Ilium. Jove the Thunderer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretches his great hand o’er her, and her sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take courage. Go ye now, and take with you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This message to the princes of the Greeks⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As is the office of an embassy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bid them meditate some wiser plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To save their galleys and the host of Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the hollow barques. The plan which brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You hither cannot serve you while I keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My anger unappeased. Let Phoenix stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pass the night with us, that he may sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tomorrow, if it please him, to the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We love; I take him not against his will.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ceased; and silent were the ambassadors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Astonished at his passionate words. At last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoenix, the aged knight, with many tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sighs, took up the word, in grief and fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest Hector should destroy the Grecian fleet:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Illustrious son of Peleus, if indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt return, nor carest to repel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From our swift galleys the consuming fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because thou art offended, how shall I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear child, remain without thee? When at first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peleus, the aged knight, from Phthia sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee, yet a boy, to Agamemnon’s aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unskilled as then thou wert in cruel war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And martial councils⁠—where men also gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A great renown⁠—he sent me with thee, charged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To teach thee both, that so thou mightst become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In words an orator, in warlike deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An actor. Therefore, my beloved child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not willingly shall I remain behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even though a god should promise me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, overcoming the decays of age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I might become a beardless youth again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when from Hellas and its companies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lovely maids I came a fugitive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left Amyntor, son of Ormenus⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father⁠—angry with me for the sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a fair-tressed wanton, whom he loved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Treating my mother basely. To my knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother came and prayed me ceaselessly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First, to possess the woman, that she then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might loathe the elder one; and I obeyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father knew it, and with many a curse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invoked the hateful furies to forbid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That any child who owed his birth to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should ever sit upon his knees. The gods⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Jove of Hades and dread Proserpine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confirmed his curse. To slay him with the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was my first thought. Some god subdued my wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reminding me of what the public voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would say, and infamy that would ensue⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest I among the Achaians should be called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A parricide. I could not brook to dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my father’s palace while he thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was wroth with me. My kindred and my friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came round me, and besought me to remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stayed beside me. Many a fatling ewe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a slow-paced ox with curving horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They slew, and many a fattened swine they stretched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the flame of Vulcan. From the casks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the old chief his wine was freely drawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine nights they slept surrounding me, while each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept watch in turn: nor ever were the fires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put out; one blazed beneath the portico</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the fair hall, and near the chamber-door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another glimmered in the vestibule.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when upon me rose the tenth dark night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I broke my aptly-jointed chamber-doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And issued forth, and easily o’erleaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wall around the palace, quite unseen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of watching men and of the serving maids.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fled through spacious Hellas to the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phthia, nurse of flocks, and to her king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peleus, who kindly welcomed me, and loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me as a father loves his only son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born to large wealth in his declining years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He made me rich, and gave me sovereign rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over much people. My abode was fixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In farthest Phthia, where I was the prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Dolopians. As for thee, my care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Godlike Achilles, made thee what thou art.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I loved thee from my soul: thou wouldst not go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With any other to the feast, nor take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy food at home until upon my knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I placed thee, carved thy meats, and gave them thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And poured thy wine. The tunic on my breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was often wetted by thee when the wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gushed in thy petulant childhood from thy lips.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus many things did I endure for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many toils perform; and since the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vouchsafed no son to me, it was my thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To train thee as a son, that thou mightst be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O godlike man! the bulwark of my age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now subdue that mighty spirit of thine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ill it becomes thee to be merciless:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods themselves are placable, though far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above us all in honor and in power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And virtue. We propitiate them with vows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Incense, libations, and burnt-offerings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prayers for those who have offended. Prayers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are daughters of almighty Jupiter⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lame, wrinkled, and squint-eyed⁠—that painfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow Misfortune’s steps; but strong of limb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swift of foot Misfortune is, and, far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outstripping all, comes first to every land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there wreaks evil on mankind, which prayers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do afterwards redress. Whoe’er receives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove’s daughters reverently when they approach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him willingly they aid, and to his suit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They listen. Whosoever puts them by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With obstinate denial, they appeal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Jove, the son of Saturn, and entreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he will cause Misfortune to attend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The offender’s way in life, that he in turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May suffer evil and be punished thus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore, Achilles! do thou also yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The honor due Jove’s daughters, freely given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By other valiant men. If Atreus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought thee no gifts, nor promised others still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But kept his anger, I would never ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou shouldst lay aside thy wrath and come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To help the Argives in their bitter need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he bestows large gifts, and adds a pledge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of others yet in store, and he hath sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The best men of the army, who to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are dearest, to entreat thee. Spurn thou not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These, nor their embassy, although at first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine anger was not causeless. We have heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The praise of heroes of the elder time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inflamed to vehement anger, yet appeased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By gifts, and yielding to persuasive words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One instance I remember: long ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It happened, and I will relate it here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among my friends. Around the city-walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Calydon did the Curetes strive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle with the Aetolians; they destroyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other fearfully. The Aetolians fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To save the pleasant town of Calydon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Curetes warred to lay it waste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diana of the golden throne had caused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war, displeased with Oeneus, who withheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her the first-fruits of his fertile field:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While hecatombs were burnt in sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feast the other gods, to her alone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughter of Jove⁠—no offering was brought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For either he forgot, or thought the rite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of little moment; but he greatly erred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the child of Jove, the archer-queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Incensed, sent forth against him from the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white-tusked wild boar, which upon his lands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entered, and ravaged them, and brought to earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many tall trees: tree after tree they fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With roots uptorn, and all the blossoms on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That promised fruit. Him Meleager, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Oeneus, slew, with many hunters called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From neighboring cities, bringing many hounds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few could not subdue him: he had made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many already mount the funeral pile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diana kindled round the boar a strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the beast’s head and bristly hide⁠—a war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twixt the Curetes and the Aetolian band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of braves. The war, while Meleager fought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went not with the Curetes, nor could they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though many, keep the field. But wrath at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seized Meleager⁠—wrath, which rages oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even in prudent minds. Incensed against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Althaea, his own mother, he remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At home with Cleopatra, his young wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beauteous, whom a delicate-footed dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marpessa, daughter of Evenus, bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Idas, bravest in his time among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of men⁠—so brave that once he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bow against Apollo for the sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his neat-footed bride. The honored pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the palace used to call their child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcyone; for when the archer-god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo, from her husband bore away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mother, Cleopatra sadly wailed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As wails the halcyon. So beside his spouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt Meleager, brooding ever o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The violent anger which his mother’s curse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had kindled. Grieving for a brother’s death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She supplicated heaven, and often struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her hands against the teeming earth, and called⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kneeling, her bosom all bedewed with tears⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Pluto and the cruel Proserpine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To put her son to death. From Erebus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pitiless Erinnys, wandering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In darkness, heard the prayer. Then straightway rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sound of fearful tumult at the gates:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The towers were battered, and the elder chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Aetolians hastened to entreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aid of Meleager, and they sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Priests of the gods, a chosen band, to pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he would come to their defence. Large gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They promised. Where the soil of Calydon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was best, they bade him choose a fruitful field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fifty acres, half for vines, and half,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleared of the trees, for tillage. Earnestly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did aged Oeneus, famed for horsemanship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beseech him; to the chamber of his son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-roofed, he climbed, and at the threshold shook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The massive doors with knocking as he sued.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sisters and his reverend mother joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their supplications: he resisted still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And much his friends, the dearest and most prized,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Besought him, but they vainly strove to swerve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His steadfast mind, till his own chamber felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assault, and the Curetes climbed the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fire the populous city. Then the nymph,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His graceful wife, entreated him with tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spake of all the horrors which o’ertake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A captured city⁠—all the men cut off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By massacre, the houses given to flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The children and deep-bosomed women dragged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into captivity. Her sorrowful words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He heard; his spirit was disturbed; he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gird his glittering armor on, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saved the Aetolians from a fearful doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obeying his own impulse. The reward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rare and costly gifts they gave him not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though thus he rescued them. Be not thy thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like his, my friend; let no invisible power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Persuade thee thus to act. Far worse it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wait, and when our fleet is all on fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Offer thy aid. Accept the gifts at once:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then will the Greeks, as if thou wert a god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hold thee in honor. If without the gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou enter later on the field of fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt not have like honor with the host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although thou turn the assault of battle back.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then did Achilles, swift of foot, reply:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O ancient Phoenix, father, loved of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such honor need I not; for the decree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove, I deem, already honors me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will detain me by my beakèd ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While breath is in my lungs, and I have power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To move these knees. Yet one thing I would say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear it thou in mind⁠—vex not my soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With weeping and lamenting for the sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Agamemnon; it becomes thee not⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou who art loved by me⁠—to yield thy love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him, unless thou wouldst incur my hate. its</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shouldst be the enemy of him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wrongs me. Reign thou equally with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And share my honors. These will carry back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My answer. Thou remain, and, softly couched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleep here: with early morn will we consult</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether to leave this region or remain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, nodding to Patroclus, gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A signal to prepare an ample couch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Phoenix, while the other chiefs prepared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To leave the tent. Then Ajax Telamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The godlike chief, addressed his comrades thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son of Laertes, nobly born, and skilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sage devices, let us now depart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since, as it seems, the end for which we came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot be compassed thus, and we must bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With speed the unwelcome answer to the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sit expecting us; while in his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The implacable Achilles bears a fierce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And haughty heart, nor doth he heed the claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that close friendship of his fellow-chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which at the Grecian fleet exalted him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above all others. Unrelenting one!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even for a brother’s death a price is paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when a son is slain: the slayer dwells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At home among his people, having made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The appointed expiation. He to whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fine is offered takes it, and his thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of vengeance is appeased. But in thy heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods have kindled an unquenchable rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All for a single damsel⁠—and behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven more we offer, passing beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many gifts beside. Let, then, thy mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be softened: have respect to thine own roof;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we are guests beneath it, sent from all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assembled host, and strong is our desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be thy dearest and most cherished friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the Achaians, many as they are.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Achilles the swift-footed answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Illustrious Ajax, son of Telamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prince of the people! All that thou hast said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I well perceive, is prompted by thy heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine swells with indignation when I think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How King Atrides mid the assembled Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaped insults on me, as if I had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wretched vagabond. But go ye now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear my message. I shall never think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bloody war till noble Hector, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam, slaughtering in his way the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall reach the galleys of the Myrmidons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lay the fleet in flames. But when he comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my own tent and galley, he, I think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though eager for the combat, will desist.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. Each raised a double cup and poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Libations to the gods; they then returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the fleet. Ulysses led the way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Patroclus bade the attendant men and maids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strew with all speed a soft and ample bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Phoenix. They obeyed, and spread the couch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With skins of sheep, dyed coverlets, and sheets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lawn; and there the old man lay to wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious morn. Meantime Achilles slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the tent’s recess, and by him lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phorbas’s daughter, whom he carried off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Lesbos⁠—Diomede, rosy-cheeked.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the other side Patroclus lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With slender-waisted Iphis by his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given by the great Achilles when he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scyros the tall, where Enyeus ruled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now when the ambassadors were come within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tent of Agamemnon, all the chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose, one by one, and, lifting up to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their golden goblets, asked the news they brought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And first Atrides, king of men, inquired:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Renowned Ulysses, glory of the Greeks!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me, will he protect our fleet from flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or does he, in his wrath and pride, refuse?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the hardy chief Ulysses thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Atrides Agamemnon, glorious king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men! He will not let his wrath abate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rages yet more fiercely, and contemns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee and thy gifts. He leaves thee to consult</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thine Achaians by what means to save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fleet and army; for himself he means</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tomorrow, with the early dawn, to launch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His well-appointed galleys on the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will advise the other Greeks to spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sails for home, since they will never see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The overthrow of lofty Troy, for Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Thunderer stretches his protecting hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above her, and her sons have taken heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such are his words; and those who went with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are present⁠—Ajax and the heralds both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sage men⁠—the witnesses to what I say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged Phoenix stays behind to sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the morrow to attend his chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their beloved country⁠—if he will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For else by no means will he take him hence.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and all were silent, all amazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At what they heard, for these were bitter words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long sat the sons of Greece in silent thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Diomed, the great in battle, spake:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Atrides Agamemnon, glorious king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men! I would thou hadst not deigned to ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The illustrious son of Peleus for his aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With offer of large gifts; for arrogant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is at all times: thou hast made him now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More insolent. Now leave him to himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To go or to remain: he yet will fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When his mood changes, or some god within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall move him. Let us do what I advise:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betake we all ourselves to rest, but first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refresh ourselves with food and wine; in them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is strength and spirit. When the rosy morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall shine, command thou that the foot and horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be speedily drawn up before the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou encourage them with cheerful words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fight among them in the foremost rank.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. The kings assented, and admired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The words of the horse-tamer Diomed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, pouring out libations, to their tents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They all departed, and lay down to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took into their souls the balm of sleep.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
