<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 19: The Reconciliation of Achilles and Agamemnon</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Reconciliation of Achilles and Agamemnon</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Thetis brings to Achilles the Armor forged by Vulcan.⁠—The Body of Patroclus preserved by the Gods from Corruption.⁠—An Assembly of all the Army, before whom Agamemnon and Achilles make Speeches, and renounce their Enmity.⁠—Brise is restored to Achil les, and the Presents of Agamemnon accepted by him.⁠—Lament of Briseis over Patroclus.⁠—Sorrow of Achilles.⁠—He arms himself for the War.⁠—His Speech to the Horses of Patroclus whom he upbraids for having suffered their Master to be slain.⁠—The Answer of one of them named Xanthus, warning Achilles of his approaching Death .</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-19" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>In saffron-colored mantle from the tides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ocean rose the Morning to bring light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gods and men, when Thetis reached the fleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bringing the gift of Vulcan. There she found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her son, who, bending o’er Patroclus, wept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aloud, and all around a troop of friends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lamented bitterly. Beside him stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glorious goddess, took his hand, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Leave we the dead, my son, since it hath pleased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gods that he should fall; and now receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This sumptuous armor, forged by Vulcan’s hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful, such as no man ever wore.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The goddess spake, and laid the armor down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before Achilles; as they touched the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The well-wrought pieces clanked, and terror seized</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Myrmidons. No one among them all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dared fix his gaze upon them; all shrank back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles only, as he saw them, felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spirit roused within him. In his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A terrible brightness flashed, as if of fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lifted up the god’s magnificent gift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rejoicing, and, when long his eyes had dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delighted on the marvellous workmanship,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus to his mother said, in wingèd words:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“A god indeed, my mother, must have given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These arms, the work of heavenly hands: no man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could forge them. Now I arm myself for war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for the valiant Menoetiades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I greatly fear that flies will gather round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wounds inflicted by the spear, and worms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be bred within them, to pollute the corpse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now that the life is gone, and taint the whole.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And silver-footed Thetis answered thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Son, have no care for that. The task be mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To drive away the importunate swarm that feed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On heroes slain in battle. Though it lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whole year long, the body shall remain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even more than uncorrupted. Call thou now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To council all the Achaian chiefs; renounce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy feud with Agamemnon, king of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And arm for war, and put on all thy might.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She spake, and called a fiery courage up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the hero’s breast. The goddess then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Infused ambrosia and the ruddy juice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of nectar through the nostrils of the dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the frame, to keep it from decay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Along the beach the great Achilles went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calling with mighty shouts the Grecian chiefs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then even they who till that day remained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the fleet⁠—the pilots and the men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who held the helm, the stewards of the ships,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the purveyors⁠—all made haste to swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The assembly, for they knew that he who long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had borne no part in the disastrous war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had now come forth. Two ministers of Mars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brave Tydides and the nobly born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ulysses, both supported by their spears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came halting, for their wounds were painful yet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They came and sat among the foremost chiefs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And last came Agamemnon, king of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wounded, for he had felt in thick of fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The edge of the sharp spear which Coon bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Antenor’s son. Now when the Greeks were all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assembled, swift Achilles rose and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Atrides, of a truth it would have been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better for both of us had we done this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first, though sorely angered, when we strove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a girl’s sake so fiercely. Would that she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had perished in my ships, by Dian’s shaft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day on which I laid Lyrnessus waste!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many Greeks would then have not been forced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slain by the enemy’s hand, to bite the dust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the great earth, while I was brooding o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My wrath. All that was for the good of Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hector; but the Greeks, I think, will long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remember our contention. Let us leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things among the things that were, and, though</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They make us grieve, let us subdue our minds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what the time requires. Here then my wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall end; it is not meet that it should burn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forever.’ Hasten thou and rouse to war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The long-haired Greeks, that I may yet again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go forth among the men of Troy, and learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they design to encamp another night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the fleet. There is among them all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No man, I ween, who will not joyfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sit down when he escapes my deadly spear.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He ended, and the Achaians all rejoiced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear the brave Pelides thus renounce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His anger. Agamemnon, king of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then rose. He came not forth into the midst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But stood beside his seat, and thus he spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O friends, Achaian heroes, ministers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Mars! Whoever rises up to speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T is well to hear him through, and not break in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his speech, else is the most expert</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confounded. Who amid a clamorous throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can listen or can speak? The orator</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of clearest voice must utter it in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I address Pelides; for the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearken ye all, and ponder what I say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Greeks speak often of this feud, and cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blame on me. Yet was I not the cause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Jupiter and Fate, and she who walks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In darkness, dread Erynnis. It was they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who filled my mind with fury in the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When from Achilles I bore off his prize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What could I do? A deity prevails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all things. Atè, mighty to destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daughter of Jove, and held in awe by all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delicate are her feet; she never comes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near to the ground, but glides above the heads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of men, to do them harm, and in her net</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entangles one at least of two who strive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jove, deemed the mightiest among men and gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once felt her power of mischief. Him his spouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juno, entrapped by cunning, when within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The massive walls of Thebes Alcmena lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In childbed, and the mighty Hercules</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was near his birth. For Jupiter had said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boastfully to the immortals: ‘Hear, ye gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And goddesses, what I am moved to speak:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This day shall Ilithyia, who presides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At births, bring into light a prince whose rule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The neighboring tribes shall own; he shall be one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who bears the blood of my illustrious race.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Imperial Juno thus, with words of guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made answer: ‘What thou sayest will prove false,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor wilt thou keep thy word. Now swear to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Olympius, with the irrevocable oath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That whosoever of thy race shall fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This day between a woman’s feet shall bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rule o’er all the neighboring tribes.’ She spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Jove, perceiving not her craft, complied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And took the mighty oath, but afterward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found himself wronged. For Juno, darting forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shot from the Olympian summit, and at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alighted at Achaian Argos. There</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She found the noble wife of Sthenelus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son of Perseus, pregnant with a son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the seventh month. She caused him to be born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The number of his months yet incomplete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kept Alcmena’s hour of childbirth back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stayed her pangs. The goddess then made haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bear the tidings to Saturnian Jove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘O Father Jupiter, by whom are hurled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ruddy lightnings, I have news for thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man-child of a generous stock is born⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eurystheus, whom the Argives shall obey⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Born at this hour to Sthenelus, the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Perseus, who is thine. And well it is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That such a prince should rule the Argive race.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“She ended: Jupiter was deeply grieved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, seizing Atè by her shining locks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his great wrath, he swore a mighty oath⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Atè, whose delight it is to bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mischief to all, should never tread again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Olympus and the starry floor of heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus having sworn, he swung her, with raised arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On high, and hurled her from the starry heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Downward, where soon she reached the haunts of men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet oft in after time because of her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sighed, beholding his beloved son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doomed by Eurystheus to unworthy tasks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I, while crested Hector in his might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made havoc at our fleet among the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even by their prows, remembered well my fault.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now since I have borne the penalty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Jupiter it was who took away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My reason, I would gladly make amends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With liberal gifts. But rise and join the war;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inflame the courage of the rest; the gifts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will I supply⁠—all that were promised thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When nobly born Ulysses yesterday</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went to thy tents. Or, if it please thee, wait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though armèd for battle, and my train shall bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The treasures from my ship, that thou mayst see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My presents are peace-offerings indeed.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The swift of foot, Achilles, answered thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Most glorious son of Atreus, king of men!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether, O Agamemnon, thou wilt give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gifts, as is meet, or keep them, rests with thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now let us think of war; it is not well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To waste the hour in talking, and put off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty work that we have yet to do.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let every Greek among you, as he sees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles fighting in the foremost ranks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slaughtering the Trojan phalanxes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take heart and boldly combat with his man.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And then Ulysses, wise in council, spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answering Achilles: “Nay, thou shouldst not thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brave as thou art, lead on the sons of Greece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet fasting, to the conflict with the men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Troy beside their city. No brief space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The struggle will endure when once the foes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rush on each other, and a god inspires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both hosts with fury. Bid the Achaians take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In their swift galleys food and wine; in these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are force and vigor. No man can endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To combat all the day till set of sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save with the aid of food, however great</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The promptings of his valor; for his limbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grow heavy, thirst and hunger weaken him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his knees fail him as he walks. Not so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warrior well supplied with food and wine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He fights the foe all day; a resolute heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is in his bosom; nor does weariness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’ertake him till all others leave the field.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now let the people be dismissed awhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a repast be ordered. Let the king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Atrides, bring huo the assembly here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His gifts, that all the Greeks may look on them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou rejoice to see them. Let him rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Greeks, and take a solemn oath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he has ne’er approached the maiden’s bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To claim a husband’s right. Thus let thy heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be satisfied. Yet let the monarch spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sumptuous banquet in his tent for thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thy redress may be complete. And thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Atrides, wilt hereafter be more just</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To others. It dishonors not a king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make amends to one whom he has wronged.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And then King Agamemnon spake in turn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Son of Laertes, gladly have I heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thou hast said, and well hast thou discoursed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all things in their order. I will take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The oath of which thou speakest⁠—so my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commands me. In the presence of a god</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I take it, and commit no perjury.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now let Achilles, though he longs for war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delay awhile; and all assembled here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remain ye on the ground till from my ship</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gifts are brought. This charge and this command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I give to thee, Ulysses. Take with thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A band of youths, the noblest of the host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bring the presents promised yesterday</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Peleus’ son, and hither let them lead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The women. Meantime let Talthybius haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bring from our broad camp a boar, which I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will offer up to Jove and to the Sun.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The swift of foot, Achilles, thus replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Most glorious son of Atreus, king of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things are for the time when there shall come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pause from battle, and this warlike heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within my breast shall cool. They whom the spear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hector, son of Priam, has o’ercome</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lie mangled on the earth, since Jupiter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awarded him the glory of the day:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ye propose a banquet. I would call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sons of Greece to rush into the war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unfed and fasting, and when this disgrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be avenged, I would, at sunset, spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A liberal feast. Be sure that I, till then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taste neither food nor drink, while my slain friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies gashed with weapons in my tent, amidst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sorrowing comrades. Little I regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The things of which thou speakest, for my thoughts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are all of bloodshed and of dying groans.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ulysses, the sagacious, thus rejoined:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Achilles, son of Peleus, bravest far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the Achaians, mightier with the spear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By no small odds than I, yet do I stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In prudence much above thee; I have lived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More years, and more have learned. Let then thy mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accept what I shall say. Men soon become</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weary of warfare, even when the sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lays its most ample harvest on the earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fewer sheaves are reaped when Jupiter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The arbiter of battles, turns the scale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is not well that we of Greece should mourn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dead with fasting, since from day to day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our warriors fall in numbers. Where were then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Respite from daily fasts? Lay we our slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In earth and moutn a day. We who outlive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cruel combat should refresh ourselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With food and wine, that we may steadily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maintain in arms the conflict with the foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then let no man idly wait to hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A further call to war⁠—for it will come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freighted with evil to the man who skulks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the ships⁠—but let us all go forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wage fierce battle with the knights of Troy.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and summoned to his side the sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of glorious Nestor, and Meriones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Meges, son of Phyleus, and with them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thoas, and Lycomedes, Creon’s son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Melanippus. Straight they took their way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Agamemnon’s tent, and there their task</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was done as quickly as the word was given.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They brought seven tripods forth, the promised gifts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twenty burnished caldrons, and twelve steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And led away seven graceful women trained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In household arts⁠—the maid with rosy cheeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Briseis, was the eighth. Ulysses came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leading the way, and bearing, duly weighed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten talents, all of gold. The Achaian youths</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Followed, and placed the presents in the midst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that assembly. Agamemnon rose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then Talthybius, who was like a god</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In power of voice, came near and took his place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the monarch, holding in his hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A boar. The son of Atreus drew a knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which hung by the great scabbard of his sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, cutting off the forelock of the boar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prayed with uplifted hands to Jupiter:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime the Greeks in silence kept their seats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as became them, listened to the king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who looked into the sky above, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now first bear witness, Jove, of all the gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greatest and best, and also Earth and Sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Furies dwelling under Earth, who take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vengeance on men forsworn, that never I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have laid, for purpose of unchaste desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or other cause, my hand upon the maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Briseis. She hath dwelt inviolate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within my tents. If yet in aught I say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lurk perjury, then may the blessed gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heap on my head the many miseries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which they punish those who falsely swear!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and drew the unrelenting blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the animal’s throat. Talthybius took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swung the carcass round, and cast it forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the gray sea’s depths, to be the food</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fishes. Then again Achilles rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the warlike sons of Greece, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Great sorrows thou dost send, O Father Jove!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon mankind; for never would the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Atreus have provoked the wrath that burned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within my bosom, never would have thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bear away the maiden from my tent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In spite of me, had it not been the will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Jupiter that many a Greek should die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But banquet now, and then prepare for war.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake Achilles, and at once dissolved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The assembly, each repairing to his ship</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save the large-hearted Myrmidons, who still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were busy with the gifts, and carried them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward their great general’s galley. These they laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Carefully in the tents, and seated there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The women, while the attentive followers drave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coursers to the stables. When the maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Briseis, beautiful as Venus, saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patroclus lying gashed with wounds, she sprang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And threw herself upon the dead, and tore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her bosom, her fair cheeks and delicate neck;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus the graceful maiden, weeping, said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Patroclus, dear to my unhappy heart!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I left thee in full life, when from this tent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They led me; I return and find thee dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O chieftain of the people! Thus it is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sorrow upon sorrow is my lot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him to whose arms my father, in my youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gracious mother gave me as a bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw before our city pierced and slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the three brothers whom my mother bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slain also⁠—brothers whom I dearly loved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thou, when swift Achilles struck to earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My hapless husband, and laid waste the town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of godlike Mynes, wouldst not suffer me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To weep despairingly; for thou didst give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy word to make me yet the wedded wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of great Achilles, bear me in the fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Phthia, and prepare the wedding feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Myrmidons. O ever kind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mourn thy death, and cannot be consoled.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Weeping she spake; the women wept with her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seemingly for the dead, but each, in truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For her own griefs. Meanwhile the elders came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around Achilles, praying him to join</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The banquet, but the chief, with sighs, refused.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Dear comrades, if ye love me, do not thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press me to sit and feast. A mighty woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weighs down my spirit; it is my resolve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wait and bear until the setting sun.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So saying, he dismissed the other kings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sons of Atreus, and the high-born chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ulysses, Nestor, and Idomeneus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Phoenix, aged knight, alone remained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And anxiously they sought to comfort him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his great grief; but comfort would he none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere entering the red jaws of war. He drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep sighs, and, thinking on Patroclus, spake:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The time has been when thon too, hapless one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dearest of all my comrades, wouldst have spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With diligent speed before me in my tent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A genial banquet, while the Greeks prepared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For desperate battle with the knights of Troy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou liest now a mangled corse, and I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through grief for thee, refrain from food and drink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though they are near. No worse calamity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could light on me, not even should I hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>News of my father’s death, who haply now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tenderly mourns with tears his absent son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Phthia, while upon a foreign coast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wage for hated Helen’s sake the war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the Trojans; or were I to hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tidings that my beloved son had died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The noble Neoptolemus, who now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If living, is in Scyros, growing up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To manhood. Once the hope was in my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I alone should perish here at Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the Argive pastures full of steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou return to Phthia and bring home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My son from Scyros in thy ship, and show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youth my wealth, my servants, and my halls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High-roofed and spacious. For my mind misgives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Peleus either lives not, or endures</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A painful age, and hardly lives, yet waits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear the sorrowful news that I am slain.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake he weeping, and the elders sighed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see his tears, as each recalled to mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those whom he left at home, while Saturn’s son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beheld their grief with pity, and bespake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His daughter Pallas thus with winge;! words:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My child, wilt thou desert that valiant man?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shall Achilles be no mote thy care?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, by his ships, before their lofty prows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sits, lamenting his beloved friend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest are at the banquet; he remains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apart from them, and fasting. Hasten thou;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With nectar and ambrosial sweets refresh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His frame, that hunger overtake him not.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As thus he spake he sent the goddess forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eager to do her errand. Plunging down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In form a shrill-voiced harpy with broad wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She cleft the air. The Greeks throughout the camp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were putting on their armor. She infused</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the hero’s frame ambrosial sweets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nectar, that his limbs might not grow faint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hunger. Then the goddess sought again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stable mansion of Almighty Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While all the Greeks came pouring from the fleet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when the flakes of snow fall thick from heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Driven by the north wind sweeping on the clouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before it, so from out the galleys came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Helms crowding upon helms that glittered fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strong hauberks, bossy shields, and ashen spears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gleam of armor brightened heaven and earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mighty was the sound of trampling feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amidst them all the great Achilles stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Putting his armor on; he gnashed his teeth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes shot fire; a grief too sharp to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was in his heart, as, filled with rage against</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The men of Troy, he cased his limbs in mail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gift of Vulcan, from whose diligent hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It came. And first about his legs he clasped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beautiful greaves, with silver fastenings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fitted the corselet to his bosom next,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from his shoulders hung the brazen sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With silver studs, and then he took the shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Massive and broad, whose brightness streamed as far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the moon’s rays. And as at sea the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of beacon, blazing in some lonely spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By night, upon a mountain summit, shines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mariners whom the tempest’s force has driven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from their friends across the fishy deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from that glorious buckler of the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Peleus, nobly wrought, a radiance streamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the sky. And then he raised and placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his head the impenetrable helm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With horse-hair plume. It glittered like a star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the shining tufts of golden thread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which the maker’s hand had thickly set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its cone, were shaken. Next the high-born chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tried his new arms, to know if they were well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adjusted to his shape, and left his limbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free play. They seemed like wings, and lifted up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shepherd of the people. Then he drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From its ancestral sheath his father’s spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heavy and huge and tough. No man of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Grecian host could wield that weapon save</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles only. ’T was a Pelian ash,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Chiron for his father had cut down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Pelion’s highest peak, to be the death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heroes. Meantime, busy with the steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Automedon and Alcimus put on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their trappings and their yoke, and round their necks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bound the fair collars, thrust into their mouths</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bit, and backward drew the reins to meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The well-wrought chariot. Then Automedon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took in his hand the showy lash, and leaped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the seat. Behind him, all equipped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For war, Achilles mounted, in a blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of arms that dazzled like the sun, and thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Called to his father’s steeds with terrible voice:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Xanthus and Balius, whom l’odargè bore⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A noble stock⁠—I charge you to bring back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the Grecian camp, the battle done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him whom ye now are bearing to the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor leave him, as ye left Patroclus, dead.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Swift-footed Xanthus from beneath the yoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answered him with bowed head and drooping mane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, flowing through the yoke-ring swept the ground⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Juno gave him then the power of speech:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For this one day, at least, we bear thee safe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O fiery chief, Achilles! but the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of death draws nigh to thee, nor will the blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be ours; a mighty god and cruel fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ordain it. Not through our neglect or sloth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did they of Troy strip off thy glorious arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From slain Patroclus. That invincible god,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son of golden-haired Latona, smote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hero in the foremost ranks, and gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glory to Hector. Even though our speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were that of Zephyr, fleetest of the winds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet certain is thy doom to be o ercome</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In battle by a god and by a man.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus far he spake, and then the Furies checked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His further speech. Achilles, swift of foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replied in anger: “Xanthus, why foretell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My death? It is not needed; well I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fate⁠—that here I perish, far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Peleus and my mother. I shall fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I have made the Trojans sick of war.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and, shouting to his firm-paced steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drave them, among the foremost, toward the war.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
