<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 21: The Battle in the River Scamander</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-21" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Battle in the River Scamander</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Flight of the Trojans before Achilles, some toward Troy, and the rest toward the river Scamander⁠—Twelve Trojan youths made captive in the river, to be butchered at the funeral pile of Patroclus⁠—Insult offered by Achilles to the god of the river, who causes his waters to rush against him, and forces him to flee for his life⁠—Interference of Vulcan, who is summoned by Juno to the aid of Achilles, and who, by drying up the waters of the river, compels it to submit⁠—Combat of Mars and Minerva, and of the other gods⁠—Achilles decoyed away from the gates of Troy by Apollo disguised in the form of Agenor, while the Trojans enter the city.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Now when they reached the pleasant banks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eddying Xanthus runs, the river sprung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From deathless Jove, Achilles drave his foes through which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asunder. Part he chased across the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Townward, along the way by which the Greek;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In terror fled the day before, pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By glorious Hector. Panic-struck they ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along that way, while, to restrain their flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before them Juno hung a veil of cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And darkness. Meanwhile half the flying crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaped down to that deep stream and rolled among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its silver eddies. With a mighty noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They plunged; the torrent dashed; the banks around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remurmured shrilly to the cries of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who floated struggling in the current’s whirl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when before the fierce, devouring flames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A swarm of locusts, springing into air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fly toward a river, while the fire behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crackles with sudden fierceness, and in fright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fall into the waves, the roaring stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the deep-eddied Xanthus thus was filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before Achilles with a mingled crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of steeds and men. The Jove-descended man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left leaning on the tamarisks his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the river’s border, and leaped in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed only with his sword, intent to deal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death on the fugitives; on every side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He smote, and from the smitten by the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose lamentable cries; the waves around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew crimson with their blood. As when before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dolphin of huge bulk the fishes flee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fear, and crowd the creeks that lie around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sheltered haven⁠—for their foe devours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that he overtakes⁠—the Trojans thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hid from his sight among the hollow rocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the rushing river. When his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was weary with the work of death, he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve youths alive, whose blood was yet to pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The penalty for Menoetiades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His slaughtered friend. He led them from the stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passive with fear like fawns, and tied their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind them with the well-twined cords that bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their tunics. Then he gave them to his friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who led the captives to the roomy ships.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again Achilles rushed upon the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Intent on slaughter. One he met who climbed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The river’s bank, Dardanian Priam’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lycaon, whom in former days he made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His captive, by surprise, when in the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He found him lopping with an axe the boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a wild fig-tree, that the trunk might form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The circle of a wheel. Achilles came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An unexpected foe, and bore him off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sea, and sold him in the populous isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lemnos. He was bought by Jason’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Imbrian prince, Eëtion, who had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His host, and now redeemed him with large gifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sent him to Arisba’s noble town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet thence he stole, and reached his father’s house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again, and there made merry with his friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eleven days, but on the twelfth a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delivered him again into the hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus’ son, who now would send his soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repining down to Hades. When the chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift of foot, beheld him stand unarmed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With neither helm nor shield nor spear⁠—for these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had thrown down⁠—faint with the sweaty toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of clambering up the bank, and every limb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unstrung with weariness, then wrathfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus said Achilles to his mighty soul:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O strange! My eyes behold a miracle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sure, the brave sons of Troy whom I have slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will rise up from the nether darkness yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since this man, whom I once reprieved from death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sold in Lemnos the divine, comes back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor could the ocean’s gray abyss of brine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond which many long in vain to pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Detain him in that isle. But he shall taste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sharpness of my spear, that I may prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether he after that will reappear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whether the kind earth, which holds so well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The valiant dead, can keep him in her womb.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So pondered he and stood. The Trojan drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to him, with intent to clasp his knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear-struck, yet hoping to avoid the doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bitter death. The great Achilles raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His ponderous spear to strike. Lycaon stooped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, darting underneath the weapon, seized</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero’s knees; behind him in the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear stood fixed, though eager yet for blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One arm was round his adversary’s knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other held⁠—and would not let it go⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear, while thus with wingèd words he prayed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I clasp thy knees, Achilles; look on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindly and pity me, O foster-child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove. I am thy suppliant, and may claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mercy. I partook with thee the fruits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ceres, when amid my fruitful fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou madest me a captive, carrying me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From friends and kindred to the sacred isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lemnos. Thou didst sell me there⁠—my price</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred beeves⁠—and thou shalt now receive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ransom, thrice as many. It is yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the twelfth morning since I came to Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After much hardship, and a pitiless fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betrays me to thy hands. I must believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Father Jove in wrath delivers me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee again. Laothoe brought me forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a brief life; that mother was the child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of aged Altes⁠—Altes ruling o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warlike Leleges, by whom are tilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heights of Pedasus, where Satnio flows⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Priam wedded her with other maids.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She bore two children to be slain by thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One was the godlike Polydore, whom thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst smite with thy keen spear, in the front rank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those who fought on foot. His evil fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must overtake me now, for, since a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has brought me near thee, there is no escape.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet let me tell thee this, and weigh it well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let it save my life. I came not forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the same womb with Hector, by whose hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy brave and gentle friend, Patroclus, died.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The illustrious son of Priam ended here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His prayer, and heard a merciless reply:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fool! Never talk of ransom⁠—not a word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the evil day on which my friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was slain, it pleased me oftentimes to spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans. Many a one I took alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sold; but now no man of air their race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom any god may bring within my reach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall leave the field alive, and least of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of Priam. Die thou, then; and why</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou, my friend, lament? Patroclus died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And greatly he excelled thee. Seest thou not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How eminent in stature and in form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am I, whom to a prince renowned for worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A goddess mother bore; yet will there come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me a violent death at morn, at eve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or at the midday hour, whenever he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose weapon is to take my life shall cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear or send an arrow from the string.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: the Trojan’s heart and knees grew faint;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hand let go the spear; he sat and cowered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With outstretched arms. Achilles-drew his sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote his neck just at the collar-bone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The two-edged blade was buried deep. He fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prone on the earth; the black blood spouted forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And steeped the soil. Achilles by the foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flung him to float among the river-waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And uttered, boastfully, these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lie there among the fishes, who shall feed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thy blood unscared. No mother there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall weep thee lying on thy bier; thy corpse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scamander shall bear down to the broad sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, as he sees thee darkening its face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some fish shall hasten, darting through the waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feed upon Lycaon’s fair white limbs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So perish ye, till sacred Troy be ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You fleeing, while I follow close and slay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This river cannot aid you⁠—this fair stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With silver eddies, to whose deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye offer many beeves in sacrifice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fling into its gulfs your firm-paced steeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thus ye all shall perish, till I take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full vengeance for Patroclus of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom, while I stood aloof from war, ye slew.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: and, deeply moved with inward wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The River pondered how to render vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prowess of Achilles, and avert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Destruction from the Trojans. Now the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus rushed, his ponderous spear in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay Asteropasus, who was sprung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Pelegon, and Pelegon was born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the broad river Axius, of a maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eldest-born of Acessamenus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Named Periboea; for the river-god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was joined with her in love. Achilles sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet the youth, as, rising from the stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed with two spears, he stood, his heart made strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And resolute by Xanthus, who had seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indignantly so many Trojans die⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youths whom Achilles slaughtered in his stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had no pity on them. When the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were near each other, standing face to face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift Achilles was the first to speak:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who and whence art thou that dost venture thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet me? They who seek to measure strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With me are sons of most unhappy men.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the illustrious son of Pelegon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made answer: “Brave Pelides, why inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My lineage? I am from a distant coast⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paeonia’s fertile fields; I lead to war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paeonia’s warriors with long spears, and this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is now the eleventh morning since I came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To join the war at Troy. I claim descent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Axius, the broad Axius, who pours forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fairest river on the earth. His son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Pelegon, expert to wield the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I was born to Pelegon. And now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious son of Peleus, let us fight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: Achilles raised the Pelian ash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To smite; Asteropaeus aimed at him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both lances, for he used both hands alike.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One struck the Grecian’s shield, yet passed not through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stopped by the god-given gold; the other gashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lightly the elbow of his dexter arm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The black blood spouted forth, the spear passed on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond him, and, still eager for its prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood fixed in earth. Achilles then, intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay Asteropaeus, hurled at him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His trusty spear. The weapon missed its mark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, striking the high bank, was buried there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the middle of its ashen staff.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles drew the keen sword from his thigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flew with fury toward his foe, who toiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain with sinewy arm to pluck that spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out the bank; and thrice he shook the beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fiercely, and thrice desisted, lacking strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And last he sought, by bending it, to break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ashen weapon of tiacides.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ere it snapped Achilles took his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiting him at the navel with the sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth gushed the entrails to the ground, and o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dying eyes the darkness came; and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, leaping on his breast, tore off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The armor, and exultingly exclaimed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lie there! A perilous task it was for thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat with a son of Jove, though born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thyself to a great River. I can boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descent from sovereign Jove. I owe mv birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Peleus, ruler of the Myrmidons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father was Aeacus, who was born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Jupiter, a god more potent far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than all the rivers flowing to the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mightier is the race of Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than that of any stream. Here close at hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is a great river, if such aid can aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avail thee; but to strive with Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not permitted. Acheloüs, king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rivers, cannot vie with him, nor yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great and mighty deep from which proceed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All streams and seas and founts and watery depths.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He trembles at the bolt of mighty Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his hoarse thunder crashing in the sky.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he spake he plucked from out the bank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brazen spear, and left the lifeless chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretched in the sand, where the dark water steeped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His limbs, and eels and fishes came and gnawed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warrior’s reins. Achilles hastened on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursuing the Pseonian knights, who now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they beheld their bravest overthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In desperate battle by the mighty arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And falchion of Pelides, took to flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the eddying river. There he slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mydon, Thersilochus, Astypylus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mnesus, and Thrasius, and struck down in death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aenius and Ophelestes. Many more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Pseonians the swift-footed Greek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had slain, had not the eddying River, roused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To anger, put a human semblance on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And uttered from its whirling deeps a voice:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O son of Peleus! Thou who dost excel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All other men in might and dreadful deeds⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the gods aid thee ever⁠—if the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Saturn gives thee to destroy the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trojans, drive them from me to the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there perform thy terrible exploits.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now my pleasant waters, in their flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are choked with heaps of dead, and I no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can pour them into the great deep, so thick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corpses clog my bed, while thou dost slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sparest not. Now then, withhold thy hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prince of the people! I am horror-struck.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Achilles the swift-footed made reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be it as thou commandest, foster-child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove, Scamander! Yet I shall not cease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay these treaty-breakers till at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shut them up within their town, and force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector to meet me, that we may decide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which shall o’ercome the other⁠—he or I.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and rushed upon the men of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Terrible as a god, while from his bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eddying River called to Phoebus thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why this, thou bearer of the silver bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou son of Jove? Thou heedest not the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Saturn’s son, who strictly bade that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst aid the Trojans till the latest gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sunset, and till night is on the fields.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then Achilles, mighty with the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the steep bank leaped into the mid-stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, foul with ooze, the angry River raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His waves, and pushed along the heaps of dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by Achilles. These, with mighty roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As of a bellowing ox, Scamander cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aground; the living with his whirling gulfs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hid, and saved them in his friendly streams.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tumult terribly the surges rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around Achilles, beating on his shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made his feet to stagger, till he grasped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tall, fair-growing elm upon the bank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down came the tree, and in its loosened roots</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought the earth with it; the fair stream was checked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the thick branches, and the prostrate trunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bridged it from side to side. Achilles sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the deep pool, and fled with rapid feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the plain in terror. Nor did then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty river-god refrain, but rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against him with a darker crest, to drive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble son of Peleus from the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so deliver Troy. Pelides sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spear’s cast backward⁠—sprang with all the speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the black eagle’s wing, the hunter-bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleetest and strongest of the fowls of air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like him he darted; clashing round his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brazen mail rang fearfully. Askance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fled; the water with a mighty roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed him close. As, when a husbandman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leads forth, from some dark spring of earth, a rill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among his planted garden-beds, and clears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its channel, spade in hand, the pebbles there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Move with the current, which runs murmuring down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sloping surface and outstrips its guide⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So rushed the waves where’er Achilles ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift as he was; for mightier are the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than men. As often as the noble son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus made a stand in hope to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether the deathless gods of the great heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conspired to make him flee, so often came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty billow of the Jove-born stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drenched his shoulders. Then again he sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away; the rapid torrent made his knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tremble, while it swept, where’er he trod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth from underneath his feet. He looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the broad heaven above him, and complained:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Will not some god, O Father Jove, put forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His power to save me in my hour of need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this fierce river? Any fate but this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am resigned to suffer. None of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The immortal ones is more in fault than she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom I owe my birth; her treacherous words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deluded me to think that I should fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the walls of Troy by the swift shafts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phoebus. Would that Hector, the most brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of warriors reared upon the Trojan soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had slain me; he had slain a brave man then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a brave man had stripped me of my arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now it is my fate to perish, caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this great river, like a swineherd’s boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in the time of rains attempts to pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A torrent, and is overwhelmed and drowned.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Neptune and Minerva came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly and stood beside him. In the form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men they came, and took his hand, and cheered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spirit with their words. And thus the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neptune, who makes the earth to tremble, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fear not, Pelides, neither let thy heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be troubled, since thou hast among the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Jove’s consent, auxiliars such as I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas. It is not thy doom to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus vanquished by a river. Soon its rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will cease, as thou shalt see. Meantime we give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This counsel; heed it well: let not thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refrain from slaughter till the Trojan host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are all shut up⁠—all that escape thy arm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the lofty walls of Troy. Then take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life of Hector, and return on board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy galleys; we will make that glory thine.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having spoken, they withdrew and joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The immortals, while Achilles hastened on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encouraged by the mandate of the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the plain. The plain was overflowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With water; sumptuous arms were floating round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bodies of slain youths. Achilles leaped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stemmed with powerful limbs the stream, and Still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went forward; for Minerva mightily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had strengthened him. Nor did Scamander fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To put forth all his power, enraged the more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the son of Peleus; higher still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His torrent swelled and tossed with all its waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus he called to Simoïs with a shout:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O brother, join with me to hold in check</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man, who threatens soon to overthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Priam’s noble city; for no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan host resist him. Come at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aid me; fill thy channel from its springs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And summon all thy brooks, and lift on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty wave, and roll along thy bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingled in one great torrent, trees and stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we may tame this savage man, who now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In triumph walks the field, and bears himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if he were a god. His strength, I deem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not avail him, nor his noble form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor those resplendent arms, which yet shall lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattered along the bottom of my gulfs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And foul with ooze. Himself too I shall wrap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sand, and pile the rubbish of my bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In heaps around him. Never shall the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know where to gather up his bones, o’erspread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By me with river-slime, for there shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His burial-place; no other tomb the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will need when they perform his funeral rites.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and wrathfully he rose against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles⁠—rose with turbid waves, and noise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And foam, and blood and bodies of the dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One purple billow of the Jove-born stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swelled high and whelmed Achilles. Juno saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trembled lest the hero should be whirled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Downward by the great river, and in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She called to Vulcan, her beloved son:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Vulcan, my son, arise! We deemed that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eddying Xanthus were of equal might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle. Come with instant aid, and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy vast array of flames, while from the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I call a tempest of the winds⁠—the West</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the swift South⁠—and they shall sweep along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fiery torrent to consume the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warriors and weapons. Thou meantime lay waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The groves along the Xanthus; hurl at him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy fires, nor let him with soft words or threats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avert thy fury. Pause not from the work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ruin till I shout and give the sign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then shalt thou restrain thy restless fires.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and Vulcan at her word sent forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fierce, devouring flames. Upon the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They first were kindled, and consumed the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That strewed it, where Achilles struck them down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ground was dried; the glimmering flood was stayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when the autumnal north-wind, breathing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A newly watered garden, quickly dries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clammy mould, and makes the tiller glad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So did the spacious plain grow dry on which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead were turned to ashes. Then the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seized on the river with his glittering fires.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The elms, the willows, and the tamarisks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell, scorched to cinders, and the lotus-herbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushes, and reeds that richly fringèd the banks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that fair-flowing current were consumed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eels and fishes, that were wont to glide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither and thither through the pleasant depths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eddies, languished in the fiery breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Vulcan, mighty artisan. The strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the great River withered, and he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Vulcan, there is none of all the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who may contend with thee. I combat not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fires like thine. Cease then. With my consent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble son of Peleus may drive out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans from their city. What have I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do with war⁠—the attack or the defence?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus in that fiery glow he spake, while seethed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His pleasant streams. As over a strong fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A caldron filled with fat of pampered swine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glows bubbling on all sides, while underneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burns the dry fuel, thus were his fair streams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scorched by the heat, and simmered, while the blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent forth by Vulcan, the great artisan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tormented him, and he besought the aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Juno with these supplicating words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why should thy son, O Juno, wreak on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fury, more than on the other gods?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fault is less than theirs who give their aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Troy; and I will cease, if thou command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid him desist, and here I pledge my oath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to attempt to save the Trojan race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From ruin, though their city sink in flames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the torches of the warlike Greeks.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This when the white-armed goddess Juno heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She said to Vulcan, her beloved son:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dear son, refrain; it is not well that thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A god should suffer for the sake of men.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and Vulcan quenched his dreadful fires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And back the pleasant waters to their bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went gliding. Xanthus had been made to yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the two combatants no longer strove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since Juno, though offended, bade them cease,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet was the conflict terrible among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other gods, as zeal for different sides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impelled them. With a loud uproar they met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other in the field; the spacious earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rebellowed to the noise, and the great heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returned it. To the ear of Jove it rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, sitting on Olympus, laughed within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His secret heart as he beheld the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contending, for not long they stood apart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shield-breaking Mars began the assault; he rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward Pallas, brandishing his brazen spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus accosted her with insolent words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou shameless one, thou whose effrontery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is boundless, why wilt thou provoke the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strife? Thy temper is most arrogant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rememberest thou the time when thou didst prompt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tydides Diomed to strike at me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was thy hand that held his shining spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aimed it well, and gave the wound; but now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will I take vengeance on thee for that wrong.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and smote Minerva’s fringèd shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dreadful aegis, which not even Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could pierce with thunderbolts. The murderous Mars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote it with his huge spear. She only stepped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Backward a space, and with her powerful hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifted a stone that lay upon the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black, huge, and jagged, which the men of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had placed there for a landmark. This she hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Mars, and struck him on the neck; he fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With nerveless limbs, and covered, as he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven acres of the field: his armor clashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him in his fall; his locks all soiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay in the trodden dust. The goddess stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er him, and boasted thus with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fool that thou art, hast thou not learned how much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The might I boast excels thine own, that thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou measurest strength with me? Now dost thou feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mother’s curse fulfilled, who meditates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy chastisement, since thou hast left the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And joined the treaty-breaking sons of Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and turned away her glorious eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove’s daughter, Venus, took the hand of Mars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And led him groaning thence, while hardly yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His strength came back. The white-armed Juno saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spake to Pallas thus, with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“See, daughter of the Aegis-bearer, Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unconquerable maid! That shameless one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the tumult, from the thick of fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leads hence the murderous Mars; but follow her.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and Pallas gladly hastened forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, overtaking Venus, dealt at her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty buffet on the breast; her heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fainted, her knees gave way; and, as she lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prostrate with Mars upon the fruitful earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exulting Pallas spake these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Would that all those who aid the cause of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And combat with the mailed Greeks were thus!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would that they were as hardy and as brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Venus here, who ventured to the help</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mars, and met the force of my right arm!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then had the stately Ilium been o’erthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long since, and we had rested from the war.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake: the white-armed Juno gently smiled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then King Neptune to Apollo said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why, Phoebus, stand we thus aloof? it ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Becomes us, while the other gods engage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In conflict. ’Twere a shame should we return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to Olympus and the brazen halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove with no blow struck. Begin, for thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art younger born, and I, who both in years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knowledge am before thee, must not make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assault. O silly god, and slow of thought!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou indeed forgotten all the wrongs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We suffered once in Troy, and only we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the gods, when, sent to earth by Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We served a twelvemonth for a certain hire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The proud Laomedon, by whom our tasks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were set? I built a city and a wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of broad extent, and beautiful, and strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stand assault; and, Phoebus, thou didst feed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His stamping oxen, with curved horns, among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lawns of woody Ida seamed with glens.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the welcome hours had brought the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our reward, the ruffian king refused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The promised wages, and dismissed us both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With menaces; to bind thee hand and foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He threatened, and to sell thee as a slave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In distant isles, and to cut off the ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of both of us. So we returned to heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Incensed at him who thus withheld the hire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He promised. Dost thou favor Troy for this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou not rather act with us until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These treaty-breakers, with their children all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their chaste matrons, perish utterly?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thus the archer-king, Apollo, spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou wouldst not deem me wise, should I contend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thee, O Neptune, for the;ike of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who flourish like the forest-leaves awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feed upon the fruits of earth and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decay and perish. Let us quit the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave the combat to the warring hosts.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and turned, afraid to meet in arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His uncle; but the sylvan Dian heard⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sister, mistress of the beasts that range</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wilds⁠—and harshly thus upbraided him:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O mighty Archer, dost thou flee and yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victory to Neptune, who bears off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A glory cheaply earned? Why dost thou bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That idle bow, thou coxcomb? I shall hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more to hear thee in our father’s halls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the presence of the immortals, boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou wilt fight with Neptune hand to bard.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The archer-god, Apollo, answered not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thus the imperial wife of Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indignantly and with reproachful words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rebuked the quivered goddess of the chase</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How is it that thou darest, shameless one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resist me? Thou wilt find it hard, though trained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In archery, to match thy strength with mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Jove has made thee among womankind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lioness, and though he gives thee power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay whomever of thy sex thou wilt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet wilt thou find it easier to strike down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mountain beasts of prey, and forest deer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than combat with thy betters. If thou choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To try the event of battle, then put forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy strength against me, and thou shalt be taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How greatly I excel in might of arm.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus Juno spake, and grasped in her left hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both Dian’s wrists, and, plucking with her right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quiver from her shoulders, beat with it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her ears, and smiled as under her quick blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sufferer writhed. To earth the arrows fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Dian weeping fled. As when a dove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not fated to be overtaken yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flees from a hawk to find her hiding-place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hollow rock, so Dian fled in tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left her arrows. To Latona, then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven’s messenger, the Argus-queller, spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Far be it from me to contend with thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Latona; perilous it were to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A consort of the Cloud-compeller, Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In combat. Go and freely make thy boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the gods that thou hast vanquished me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: Latona gathered from the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bow and shafts which in that whirl of dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had fallen here and there, and, bearing them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed her daughter, who meantime had reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Olympus and the brazen halls of Jove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, a daughter at her father’s knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sat her down, while, as she wept, her robe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heavenly texture trembled. Graciously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove smiled, and drew her toward him and inquired:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What dweller of the sky has dared do this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear child, as though some flagrant guilt were thine?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus replied the mistress of the chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowned with the crescent: “Father, ’twas thy queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white-armed Juno; she who causes strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wrath among the gods has done me wrong.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they, while to sacred Ilium came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus Apollo; ’twas his charge to watch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The well-built city’s ramparts, lest the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That day should lay it waste against the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fate. The other gods went back to heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some angry, some exulting. They sat down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the All-Father, him who darkens heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gathered clouds. Meantime Achilles chased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slew the Trojans and their firm-paced steeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, when the smoke rolls heavenward from a town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given by the angry gods a prey to fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toil is the lot of all, and bitter woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fate of many, such the woe and toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caused by Achilles to the sons of Troy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The aged Priam from a lofty tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld the large-limbed son of Peleus range</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The field, and all the Trojans helplessly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleeing in tumult. With a cry of grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came from that high station to the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave commandment to the sturdy men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stood to watch the gates along the wall:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hold the gates open while the flying host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter the city; for Achilles comes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Routing them, near at hand, and we may see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Terrible havoc. But when all our troops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are once within the walls, and breathe again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shut the close-fitting portals; for I dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest that fierce warrior rush into our streets.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: they drew the bolts and opened wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gates, and gave a refuge to the host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then leaped Apollo forth to meet their flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rescue them. All faint with burning thirst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grimed with dust, they hurried o’er the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And toward the city and its lofty walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While eagerly Achilles on their track</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pressed with his spear; his heart was full of rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all on fire his spirit with desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For glory. Then the Greeks had overthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The towery Troy, if Phoebus had not moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agenor, a young hero, nobly born.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blameless, and brave, Antenor’s son, to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles. Phoebus breathed into his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courage, as, standing by the youth, he leaned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against a beechen tree, and, wrapped from sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In darkness, watched to rescue him from death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agenor stood as he beheld approach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty spoiler, and, perplexed in mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sighed heavily, and said to his great soul:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah me! If with the routed troops I flee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From fierce Achilles, he will overtake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slay me; I shall die as cowards die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if I leave the host to be pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Peleus’ son, and by another way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flee from the wall across the plain, until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I reach the lawns of Ida, and am hid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among its thickets, then I may at eve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bathe in the river and return refreshed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Troy. But why give way to thoughts like these?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he may yet observe me as I haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ilium o’er the plain, and his swift feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May follow; there will then be no escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From death and fate, since he in might of arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excels all other men. If now I here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confront him before Troy, I cannot think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he is weapon-proof; one life alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwells in him, though Saturnian Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestows on him the glory of the day.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and firmly waited for the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus; eagerly his fearless heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Longed for the combat. As a panther leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The covert of the wood and comes to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A huntsman, nor is scared nor put to flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By noise of baying hounds, not even though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spear’s thrust or a javelin flung from far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have wounded him, yet, wounded, he fights on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until he grapples with his enemy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or perishes⁠—thus did the noble son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the renowned Antenor press to try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His prowess with Achilles, and disdained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To flee before him. Holding his round shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before his face, and with his lifted spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aimed at the Greek, he shouted thus aloud:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Renowned Achilles! Thou dost fondly know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou today wilt overthrow the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the magnanimous Trojans. Many toils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou fool! must be endured ere that can be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we are many and are brave who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within it, and shall well defend the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For our beloved parents and our wives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And little ones. Here shall thou meet thy doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave as thou art, and terrible in war.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he spake, his powerful hand dismissed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The keen-edged spear, nor missed his aim; it struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Peleus just below the knee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tin of which the greave was newly forged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rang shrilly, and sent back the brazen point;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It could not pierce the armor which a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had given. And then the son of Peleus aimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His weapon at Agenor. Phoebus came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And snatched away his triumph, bearing off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The godlike youth, Agenor, in a veil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of darkness from the perils of the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he decoyed Achilles from the host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy; the archer of the skies put on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agenor’s perfect semblance, and appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the Greek, and fled; his hasty flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was followed close. Achilles chased the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever before him, yet still near, across</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fruitful fields, to the deep-eddied stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Xanthus; for Apollo artfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made it to seem that he should soon o’ertake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His flying foe, and thus beguiled him on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime the routed Trojans gladly thronged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the city, filled the streets, and closed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The portals. None now dared without the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wait for others, or remain to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had escaped with life, and who were slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle; eagerly they flung themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the city⁠—everyone whose feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knees had borne him from the field alive.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
