<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 14: The Fraud Practised on Jupiter by Juno</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-14" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Fraud Practised on Jupiter by Juno</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Consultation of Agamemnon with Nestor, Diomed, and Ulysses⁠—Proposal of Agamemnon to withdraw from Troy by night opposed by Ulysses⁠—Visit made by these wounded chiefs to the battlefield, in order to encourage the army⁠—The cestus of Venus borrowed by Juno, who decoys Jupiter to her chamber, where he falls asleep⁠—Neptune meanwhile actively aids the Greeks, who commit great slaughter⁠—Hector wounded by Ajax.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>The mighty uproar was not unperceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Nestor’s ear, who, sitting at the wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Addressed the son of Aesculapius thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Noble Machaon, what will happen now?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bethink thee: for the clamor grows more loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From our young warriors at the ships. Stay here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drink the purple wine, while for thy limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-haired Hecamede warms the bath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And washes the dark blood away, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will climb the watch-tower, and will know the worst.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and took a buckler, fairly wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glittering with brass, and left within the tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Thrasymedes, his own knightly son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who to the war had borne his father’s shield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He grasped a ponderous spear, with brazen blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stood without the tent, and saw a sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shame⁠—the routed Greeks, and close behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The haughty Trojans putting them to flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Greek wall o’erthrown. As when the face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the great deep grows dark with weltering waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That silently forbode the swift descent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the shrill blast, the yet uncertain seas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll not to either side, till from the seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jupiter comes down the violent wind⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So paused the aged chief, uncertain yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of purpose⁠—whether he should join the throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greeks, with their swift coursers, or repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sovereign Agamemnon, Atreus’ son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This to his thought seemed wiser, and he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seek Atrides. Meantime both the hosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Urged on the work of slaughter; still they fought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still the solid brass upon their limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rang, smitten with the swords and two-edged spears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, coming from the fleet, the wounded kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nurslings of Jove, met Nestor; toward him came is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tydides, and Ulysses, and the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus, Agamemnon. On the beach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the gray deep their ships were ranged afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that fierce conflict. There the Greeks had drawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the plain’s edge, the first that touched the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And built a rampart at their sterns. Though long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shore-line, it sufficed not to contain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The galleys, and the host had scanty room;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore they drew the galleys up in rows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Row behind row, and filled the shore’s wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the promontories. There the kings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walked, leaning on their lances, to behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tumult and the fight, and inly grieved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sight of aged Nestor startled them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the royal Agamemnon spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Neleian Nestor, glory of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why hast thou left the murderous fray, and why</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come hither? Much I fear the fiery chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector, will make the menace good which once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He uttered, speaking to the men of Troy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to return to Ilium from the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till he had burned our ships with fire, and slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Us also; thus he spake, and now fulfils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His menace. O ye gods! the other Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not Achilles only, cherish hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against me in their hearts, and now refuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat even where our galleys lie.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Nestor, the Gerenian knight, replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thus is the threat accomplished, nor can Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Thunderer reverse the event. The wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which we trusted as impregnable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our fleet’s defence and ours, is overthrown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But obstinately still the Greeks maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The combat at the ships, nor couldst thou now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distinguish with thy sharpest sight where most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ranks are routed, so confusedly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fall, and the wild uproar reaches heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime consult we what may yet be done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If counsel aught avail; yet can I not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advise to mingle in the strife again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not meet that wounded men should fight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the royal Agamemnon said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Since at our ships, beneath their very sterns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The combat rages; since the wall we built</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avails not, nor the trench, at which the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Labored and suffered, hoping it might be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sure defence for us and for our fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Certain it is that to Almighty Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It hath seemed good that here the Greeks, afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Argos, should be shamefully cut off;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For well was I aware when he designed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid the Greeks, and well can I perceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he is honoring now the men of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to the blessed gods, and fettering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our valor and our hands. Hear my advice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And follow it. Let us draw down the ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearest the sea, and launch them on the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moor them, anchored, till the lonely night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall come, when, if the Trojans pause from war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haply we may draw down the other barques;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he who flees from danger, even by night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deserves no blame; and better is his fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who flees from harm than his whom harm o’ertakes.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then wise Ulysses, with stern look, replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What words, Atrides, have escaped thy lips?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhappy man, thou shouldst have held command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er some effeminate army, and not ours⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ours to whom Jupiter, from youth to age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath granted to accomplish difficult wars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until we pass away. And wouldst thou then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Depart from Troy, the city of broad streets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which we have endured so much and long?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, be thou silent, lest the other Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear words that never should be said by one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who knows to speak with wisdom, and who bears no</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sceptre, and who rules so many Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou dost. I contemn with my whole soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The counsel thou hast given, commanding us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet the battle rages, to draw down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our good ships to the sea, that so the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May see his wish more easily fulfilled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even in the hour of triumph, and our fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be certain ruin; for the Greeks no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will combat when they draw their galleys down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, looking backward to the shore, will leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle there; and thus, O king of men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will mischief flow from what thou counsellest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Agamemnon, king of men, rejoined:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou touchest me, Ulysses, to the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy harsh censure; yet I did not give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Command to drag our good ships to the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the will of the Greeks. And would there were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some other, young or old, to counsel them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More prudently, for that would please me well.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the great in battle, Diomed:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The man is here, nor have ye far to look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ye will be persuaded, and refrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To blame me angrily, because my years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are fewest midst you all. I too can boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of noble birth; my father, Tydeus, lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buried beneath a mound of earth at Thebes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Portheus three illustrious sons were born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dwelt in Pleuron, and in Calydon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lofty⁠—Agrius, Melas, and the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father’s father, Oeneus, eminent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>no Among the rest for valor; he remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At home, but, wandering thence, my father went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Argos, for the will of Jove was such⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove and the other gods. He wedded there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A daughter of Adrastus, and he dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within a mansion filled with wealth; broad fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fertile in corn were his, and many rows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of trees and vines around him; large his flocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And great his fame as one expert to wield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all other Greeks, the spear in war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This should ye know, for this is true; nor yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contemn my counsel given with careful thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for your good, nor deem it comes from one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwarlike and low-born. Now let us join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle, wounded as we are, for much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It needs our presence, keeping carefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the reach of weapons, to avoid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wound upon wound, and, cheering on the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send back into the combat those who stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart, indulgent to their weariness.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: they hearkened, and with hasty steps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went on, King Agamemnon at their head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor was the glorious power that shakes the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmindful of his charge. He went among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warriors in the semblance of a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stricken in years, and, seizing the right hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Agamemnon, spake these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O son of Atreus, the revengeful heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus’ son must leap within his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For joy, to see the slaughter and the rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Achaians, since with him there dwells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No touch of pity. May he perish too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like us, and may some god o’erwhelm his name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With infamy. With thee the blessed gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are not so far incensed, and thou shalt see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan chiefs and princes of their host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raising the dust-clouds on the spacious plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fleeing from our ships and tents to Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, shouting, strode across the field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As loud a cry as from nine thousand men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or from ten thousand hurrying to engage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle, such the cry that ocean’s king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uttered from his deep lungs. It woke anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invincible resolve in every heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Greeks to combat to the end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now, Juno of the golden throne beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, standing on the Olympian height, she cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Downward her eyes to where her brother moved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing his part with glory in the fray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And inly she rejoiced. She also saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove on the peak of Ida, down whose side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glide many brooks, and greatly was displeased.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the majestic goddess with large eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mused how to occupy the mind of him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bears the aegis. This at length seemed best:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To deck herself in fair array, and haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ida, that the God might haply yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To amorous desire, and in that hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her hand might pour into his lids, and o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His watchful mind, a soft and pleasant sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She went to her own chamber, which her son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vulcan had framed, with massive portals made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast to the lintels by a secret bolt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which none but she could draw. She entered in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And closed the shining doors; and first she took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambrosial water, washing every stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her fair limbs, and smoothed them with rich oil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambrosial, soft, and fragrant, which, when touched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within Jove’s brazen halls, perfumed the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of earth and heaven. When thus her shapely form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been anointed, and her hands had combed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her tresses, she arranged the lustrous curls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambrosial, beautiful, that clustering hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round her immortal brow. And next she threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around her an ambrosial robe, the work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pallas, all its web embroidered o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With forms of rare device. She fastened it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the breast with clasps of gold, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She passed about her waist a zone which bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fringes an hundred-fold, and in her ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She hung her three-gemmed ear-rings, from whose gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She won an added grace. Around her head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious goddess drew a flowing veil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just from the loom, and shining like the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, last, beneath her bright white feet she bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shapely sandals. Gloriously arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all her ornaments, she left her bower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And calling Venus to herself, apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all the other gods, addressed her thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wilt thou, dear child, comply with what I ask?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, angered that I aid the Greeks, while thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost favor Troy, wilt thou deny my suit?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus Jove’s daughter, Venus, made reply:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Juno, whom I reverence, speak thy thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughter of mighty Saturn! for my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commands me to obey thy wish in all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I can do, and all that can be done.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus imperial Juno, planning guile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoined: “Give me the charm and the desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With which thou overcomest gods and men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go to the far end of this green earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To visit Ocean, father of the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Mother Tethys, who, receiving me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Rhea, cherished me, and brought me up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their abodes, when Jove the Thunderer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast Saturn down to lie beneath the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And barren sea. I go to visit them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And end their hateful quarrel. For too long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have they been strangers to the marriage-bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if my words persuade them, and bring back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hearts to their old love, my name will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honored by them, and dear throughout all time.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And laughter-loving Venus answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What thou desirest should not be denied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shall not, for thou sleepest in the arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jupiter, the mightiest of the gods.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and from her bosom drew the zone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embroidered, many-colored, and instinct</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With every winning charm⁠—with love, desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dalliance, and gentle speech⁠—that stealthily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ercomes the purpose of the wisest mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, placing it in Juno’s hands, she said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This many-colored zone, and all that dwells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within it, take, and in thy bosom hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, I deem, wilt not return and leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy purpose unfulfilled.” As thus she spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The large-eyed stately Juno smiled and took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, smiling, in her bosom placed the zone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Venus, daughter of the Thunderer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to the palace. Juno took her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From high Olympus o’er Pieria’s realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rich Emathia, o’er equestrian Thrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With snowy peaks exceeding high; her feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched not the ground. From Athos suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stooped upon the tossing deep, and came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Lemnos, seat of Thoas the divine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there she met Death’s brother, Sleep, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hand in hers, and thus accosted him:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Sleep, whose sway is over all the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all mankind, if ever thou didst heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My supplication, hearken to me now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I shall be forever grateful. Close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious eyes of Jove beneath his lids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Midst our embracings, and for thy reward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt possess a sumptuous throne of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imperishable. Vulcan, my lame son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall forge it for thee, and adorn its sides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And place below a footstool, upon which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy shining feet shall rest in banqueting.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then gentle Sleep made answer, speaking thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Great Saturn’s daughter, Juno the august,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On any other of the deathless gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could I bring slumber⁠—even on the tides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the swift Ocean, parent of them all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet may I not approach Saturnian Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he command me not. Already once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He made me quail with fright before his threats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When his magnanimous son, Alcides, sailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Troy, which he had ravaged. Then I lulled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The senses of the Aegis-bearer, Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrapping myself around him, while thy mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was planning mischiefs for his son, and thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst wake the blasts of all the bitter winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sweep the ocean, and to bear away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero on its billows from his friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To populous Cos. When Jupiter awoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His anger rose; he seized and flung the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither and thither; me he chiefly sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would have cast me to destruction, down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the great heavens into the deep, if Night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose power o’ercomes the might of gods and men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not preserved me, fleeing to her shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Jove refrained, indignant as he was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For much he feared to offend the swift-paced Night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now thou bid’st me tempt my fate again.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Imperial, large-eyed Juno thus rejoined:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why rise such thoughts, O Sleep, within thy heart?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deem’st thou that Jove the Thunderer favors Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As much as he was angered for the sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hercules, his son? Do what I ask,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shalt have from me a wedded spouse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the younger Graces shall be thine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pasithea, whom thou hast desired so long”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and Sleep, delighted, answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Swear now to me, O goddess, by the Styx,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inviolable river. Lay one hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the food-producing earth, and place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other on the glimmering; sea, that all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods below, round Saturn, may attest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy promise⁠—that thou wilt bestow on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the younger Graces for my bride⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pasithea, whom I have desired so long.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and white-armed Juno willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Complied; she took the oath, and called on all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods who dwell in Tartarus below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear the name of Titans. When the oath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was taken, and the accustomed rites performed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Lemnos and from Imbrus forth they went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrouded in mist; and swiftly moving on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward Ida, seamed with rivulets and nurse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of savage beasts, they came to Lectos first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there they left the sea. Their way was now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the land, and underneath their feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forest summits shook. Sleep halted there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere yet the eye of Jupiter descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His coming, and upon a lofty fir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tallest growing on the Idaean mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High in the air among the clouds of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Springing from earth, he took his perch within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The screen of branches, like the shrill-voiced bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called Chalcis by the immortals, and by men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cymindis, haunting the high mountain-side.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Juno hastened on to Gargarus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The peak of lofty Ida. Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cloud-compeller, saw her, and at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love took possession of his mighty heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when they first were wedded, and withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their dear parents’ sight. The God drew near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stood before her, and addressed her thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why art thou hastening from Olympus thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whither; yet without thy steeds and car?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Juno answered with dissembled guile:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To the far ends of the green earth I go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To visit Ocean, father of the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Mother Tethys, in whose palace halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They nourished me, and brought me up. I go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To end their hateful quarrels, for too long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have they been strangers to the marriage-bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Incensed against each other. Now my steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting to bear me over land and sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand at the foot of Ida seamed with rills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I come to thee, lest thou perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be wroth if I unknown to thee repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where old Ocean dwells amid his deeps.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Cloud-compeller, Jupiter, rejoined:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hereafter, Juno, there will be a time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For such a journey; meantime let us give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This hour to rest and dalliance. Never yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did love of goddess or of mortal maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Possess and overcome my heart as now;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even when I loved Ixion’s dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bore Pirithoüs, prudent as a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the counsellors; nor when I loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Acrisius’ daughter with the dainty feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Danae, who brought forth Perseus, eminent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the other warrior-chiefs; nor when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I carried off from Phoenix the renowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His daughter, who bore Minos afterward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rhadamanthus. Never so I loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Semele, nor Alcmena who in Thebes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought forth to me the great-souled Hercules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My valiant son, while Bacchus, the delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men, was born of Semele; nor yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So loved I Ceres, fair-haired queen, nor yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Latona, gloriously beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor even thee, as now I love, and yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My spirit to the sweetness of desire.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Imperial Juno artfully replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Importunate Saturnius, what is this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou hast said? If on this summit height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ida we recline, where all around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is open to the sight, how will it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should any of the ever-living gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold us sleeping, and to all the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Declare it? I could never, rising thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter again thy palace, save with shame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet if thou truly speakest thy desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast a marriage-chamber of thine own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Vulcan, thy beloved son, for thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Framed, fitting to its posts the solid doors;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thither let us go to take our rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within it, since thou hast declared thy will.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake again the Cloud-compeller Jove:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Juno! fear thou not that any god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or man will look upon us. I shall throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden cloud around us, which the Sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself cannot look through, although his eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is piercing, far beyond all other eyes.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The son of Saturn spake, and took his wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his arms, while underneath the pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred Earth threw up her freshest herbs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dewy lotus, and the crocus-flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thick and soft the hyacinth. All these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upbore them from the ground. Upon this couch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They lay, while o’er them a bright golden cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered, and shed its drops of glistening dew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So slumbered on the heights of Gargarus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The All-Father, overcome by sleep and love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And held his consort in his arms. Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gentle Sleep made haste to seek the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greece. He bore a message to the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neptune, who shakes the shores, and, drawing near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thus accosted him with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now, Neptune, give the Greeks thy earnest aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though it be but for a little space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Jupiter yet slumbers, let them win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glory of the day; for I have wrapt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His senses in a gentle lethargy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To which he is betrayed by Juno’s wiles.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and took his way, departing thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the tribes of men. These words inflamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The god’s desire to aid the Greeks; he sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far on among the foremost, and exclaimed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Greeks! do ye again submit to yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victory to Hector, Priam’s son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he may seize our fleet and bear away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glory of the day? This is his hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this his boast, since now Achilles lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inactive at his ships, in sullen wrath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet little should we need him, if the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood bravely by each other. Hear me now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And do what I advise. Let all of us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The best and bravest, bearing shields, and capped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With glittering helms, and wielding in our hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The longest spears, advance, and I will lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charge; nor do I think that Hector, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam, daring as he seems, will yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abide our onset. Who so has the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make a stand with me, and yet who bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A narrow shield, let it be given to one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Less warlike, and a broader shield be found.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; they hearkened and obeyed. The kings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tydides, and Ulysses, and the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus, Agamemnon, though their wounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still galled them, marshalled and reviewed the ranks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And changed their arms; they made the braver wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The better armor, and the worse they gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the less warlike. Now, when o’er their breasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The burnished mail was girded, they began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their march; the great earth-shaker, Neptune, led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The onset, grasping in his sinewy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sword of fearful length and flashing blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like lightning. No man dared encounter it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In combat; every arm was stayed by fear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Right opposite, illustrious Hector ranged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Trojans. Dark-haired Neptune and the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam now engaged in desperate strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One on the side of Troy, and one for Greece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea swelled upward toward the Grecian tents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fleet, while both the armies flung themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against each other with a loud uproar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not with such noise the ocean-billows lash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mainland, when the violent north wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tumbles them shoreward; not with such a noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roar the fierce flames within the mountain glen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When leaping upward to consume the trees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not so loudly howls the hurricane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the lofty branches of the oaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When in its greatest fury, as now rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The din of battle from the hosts that rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against each other with terrific cries.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At Ajax glorious Hector cast his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As face to face they stood. It missed him not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But struck him where two belts upon his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erlapped each other⁠—that which held the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that which bore the silver-studded sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These saved the tender muscles. Hector, vexed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thus his weapon should have flown in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retreated toward his comrades, shunning death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he drew back, the Telamonian hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stone⁠—for stones in multitude, that propped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The galleys, lay around, and rolled among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The feet of those who struggled. One of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lifted, smiting Hector on the breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the buckler’s orb and near the neck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sent it spinning like a top; it fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whirled along the ground. As when beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stroke of Father Jupiter an oak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falls broken at the root, and from it fumes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stifling smell of sulphur, and the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him who stands and sees it sinks with dread⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fearful is the bolt of mighty Jove⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So dropped the valiant Hector to the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the dust; his hand let fall the spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shield and helm fell with him, and his mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shining brass clashed round him. Then the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed toward him, yelling fiercely, for they hoped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drag him thence; and many a lance they cast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But none by javelin or by thrust could wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd of the people, for there came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him all the bravest of his host⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polydamas, Aeneas, and the great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agenor, and Sarpedon, he who led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lycian bands, and Glaucus the renowned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These flung themselves into the strife, while none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the rest refrained, but firmly held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their broad round shields before him. Then his friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifted him in their arms, and bore him off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the conflict, to his fiery steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That waited for him in the battle’s rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With charioteer and sumptuous car; and these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore him to Ilium, sorely suffering.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when they now had reached the crossing-place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Xanthus, full of eddies, pleasant stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The progeny of ever-living Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They lifted out the hero from the car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid him on the ground, and on him poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water, at which his breath and sight returned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat upon his knees, and from his throat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave forth the purple blood, and then he fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the ground, and darkness veiled his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For still his senses felt the stunning blow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Greeks saw Hector leave the field, and pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foe more hotly, and bethought themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their old valor. Then the swift of foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oilean Ajax, darted to the van,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his fir-tree spear smote Satnius, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Enops, whom a Naiad eminent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For beauty among all the nymphs brought forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Enops, when on Satnio’s banks he kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His flocks. Oileus’ son, expert to wield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear, drew near, and pierced him in the flank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prostrate he fell, and suddenly the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Trojans gathered round in desperate fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polydamas, the mighty spearman, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Panthoüs, coming to avenge him, smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the right shoulder Prothoenor, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Areilochus. The pitiless spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed through, and falling in the dust he grasped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth with dying hands. Polydamas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouted aloud, exulting over him:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Not vainly, as I think, hath flown the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the strong hand of the magnanimous son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Panthoüs. Some Achaian hath received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon in his side, to lean upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In going down to Pluto’s dim abode.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the Achaians chafed to hear his boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And most the warlike son of Telamon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the slain Greek fell near him. Instantly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as the Trojan moved away, he hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shining lance. Polydamas, to escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The death-stroke, sprang aside. Archilochus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antenor’s son, received the blow: the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had doomed him to be slain. It pierced the spine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the head joins the neck, and severed there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tendons on each side. His head and mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nostrils struck the ground before his knees.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus to excellent Polydamas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Ajax shout in turn: “Bethink thee now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell me truly, was not this a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worthy to die for Prothoenor’s sake?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man of mean repute or meanly born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seems, but either brother to the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antenor, or his son; for certainly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His looks declare him of Antenor’s race.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; but well he knew the slain. Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans heard and grieved. Then Acamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stalking around his fallen brother, slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Promachus, the Boeotian, with his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While dragging off the dead man by the feet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then o’er the fallen warrior, Acamas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boasted aloud: “O measureless in threats!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bowmen of Argos! not to us alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall woe and mourning come; ye also yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will perish. See your Promachus o’erthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by my spear, that so my brother’s death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not be unrequited. Every man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should wish a brother left to avenge his fall.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ended, and the Greeks were vexed to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His boast; the brave Peneleus most of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was angered, and he rushed on Acamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who waited not the onset of the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his stead was Ilioneus slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Phorbas, who was rich in flocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Mercury, of all the sons of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loved most, and gave him ample wealth; his wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought Ilioneus forth, and only him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And him Peneleus smote beneath the brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the eye’s socket, forcing out the ball;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear passed through, and reappeared behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down sat the wounded man with arms outstretched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, drawing his sharp sword, Peneleus smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The middle of his neck, and lopped away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The helmèd head, which fell upon the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear still in the eye. He lifted it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one would lift a poppy up, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shouted, boasting, to the Trojan host:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Go now, ye Trojans, and inform from me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father and the mother of the slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they may mourn within their palace walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious Ilioneus. After this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall the sad wife of Promachus, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Alegenor, never hasten forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet her husband with glad looks, when we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks return from Ilium with our fleet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the Trojans all grew pale with fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gazed around for an escape from death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Say, Muses, ye who on the Olympian height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inhabit, who was first among the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gather bloody spoil, when now the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shakes the shores had turned the tide of war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>First, Ajax, son of Telamon, struck down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hyrtius, the leader of the Mysian band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And son of Gyrtias, while Antilochus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spoiled Mermerus and Phalces. Morys next,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by the weapon of Meriones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell with Hippotion. Teucer overthrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prothous and Periphoetes. Atreus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote Hyperenor, prince among his tribe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the flank; the trenchant weapon drank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The entrails, and the soul, driven forth, escaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the deep wound, and darkness veiled his eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Ajax swift of foot, Oileus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erthrew the most, for none could equal him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In swift pursuit when Jove ordained a flight.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
