<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book VII: The Combat of Hector and Ajax</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Combat of Hector and Ajax</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Prowess of Hector⁠—Meeting of Minerva and Apollo near the Scaean Gates⁠—They incite Hector to challenge the Greeks to a single combat⁠—Ajax selected by lot to meet Hector⁠—The combat ended by the night⁠—Proposal of Antenor to deliver Helen to the Greeks⁠—Refusal of Paris, who offers to restore her wealth⁠—Rejection of this offer by Agamemnon⁠—A truce for burying the dead⁠—The Greek camp fortified.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>The illustrious Hector spake, and rapidly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed through the gate, and with him issued forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother Alexander⁠—eager, both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For war and combat. As when God bestows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To glad the long-expecting mariners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A favorable wind while wearily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They beat the ocean with their polished oars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their arms all nerveless with their length of toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such to the expecting Trojans was the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the two chiefs. First Alexander slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Menesthius, who in Arnè had his home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A son of Areïthoüs the king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large-eyed Philomedusa brought him forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the mace-bearer Areïthoüs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hector smote Eïoneus, the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Piercing his neck beneath the brazen casque,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straightway he dropped lifeless. Glaucus then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Hippolochus, and chief among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lycians⁠—in that fiery onset slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iphinous, son of Dexius, with his spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It pierced the warrior’s shoulder as he sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mount his rapid car, and from the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell to earth, his limbs relaxed in death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now when Minerva of the azure eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld them in the furious combat thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wasting the Grecian host, she left the peaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of high Olympus, and came down in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sacred Ilium. Straight Apollo flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet her, for he marked from Pergamus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her coming, and he greatly longed to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victory to the Trojans. As they met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the beechen tree, the son of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king Apollo, spake to Pallas thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why hast thou, daughter of imperial Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus left Olympus in thine eager haste?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek’st thou to turn in favor of the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War’s wavering chances?⁠—for I know too well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast no pity when the men of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are perishing. But, if thou wilt give ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me, I shall propose a better way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cause we the conflict for this day to cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be it afterward renewed until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An end be made of Troy, since it hath pleased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You, goddesses, to lay the city waste.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And blue-eyed Pallas answered: “Be it so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O mighty Archer. With a like intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I left Olympus for this battle-field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greeks and Trojans. But by what device</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think’st thou to bring the combat to a pause?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the king Apollo, son of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turn to Pallas: “Let us seek to rouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fiery spirit of the Trojan knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector, that he may challenge in the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some Greek to meet him, singly and alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mortal combat. Then the well-armed Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stung by the bold defiance, will send forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A champion against Priam’s noble son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. The blue-eyed goddess gave assent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straightway Helenus, beloved son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam, in his secret mind perceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purpose of the gods consulting thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came and stood by Hector’s side and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Hector, son of Priam, and like Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council, wilt thou hearken to my words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who am thy brother? Cause the Trojans all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the Greeks to sit, while thou shall stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaiming challenge to the bravest man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Achaians to contend with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mortal combat. It is not thy fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fall and perish yet, for thus have said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ever-living gods, whose voice I heard.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and Hector, hearing him, rejoiced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And went between the hosts. He bore his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding it in the middle, and pressed back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ranks of Trojans, and they all sat down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Agamemnon caused the well-armed Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sit down also. Meantime Pallas sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Phoebus of the silver bow, in shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like vultures, on the boughs of the tall beech⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tree of Father Jupiter who bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aegis⁠—and they looked with great delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the array of warriors in thick rows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horrid with shields and helm and bristling spears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when the west wind, rising fresh, breathes o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep, and darkens all its face with waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So seemed the Greeks and Trojans as they sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ranks upon the field, while Hector stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the armies and bespake them thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye Trojans, and ye well-armed Greeks, give ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To what my spirit bids me speak. The son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Saturn, throned on high, hath not vouchsafed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ratify the treaty we have made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But meditates new miseries for us both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till ye possess the towery city of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, vanquished, yield yourselves beside the barques</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That brought you o’er the sea. With you are found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bravest sons of Greece. If one of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is moved to encounter me, let him stand forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fight with noble Hector. I propose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And call on Jove to witness, that if he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall slay me with the long blade of his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My arms are his to spoil and to bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the hollow ships; but he must send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My body home, that there the sons of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Trojan dames may burn it on the pyre.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if I take his life, and Phoebus crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My combat with that glory, I will strip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His armor off and carry it away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hallowed Ilium, there to hang it high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the temple of the archer-god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo; but his body I will send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the well-oared ships, that on the beach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long-haired Greeks may hold his funeral rites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rear his tomb by the wide Hellespont.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then, in time to come, shall someone say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sailing in his good ship the dark-blue deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘This is the sepulchre of one who died</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long since, and whom, though fighting gallantly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious Hector slew.’ So shall he say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter, and my fame shall never die.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; but utter silence held them all⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ashamed to shun the encounter, yet afraid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet it⁠—till at length, with heavy heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose Menelaus from his seat, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bespake the army with reproachful words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O boastful ones, no longer to be called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greek warriors, but Greek women! A disgrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grievous beyond all others will be ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If none be found in all the Achaian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet this Hector. May you, every one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There where ye now are sitting, turn to earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And water, craven as ye are, and lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sense of glory! I will arm myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this encounter. With the immortal gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone it rests to give the victory.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and put his glorious armor on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, Menelaus, had the Trojan’s hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ended thy life, for he was mightier far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than thou, had not the Achaian kings at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uprisen to hold thee back, while Atreus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide-ruling Agamemnon, took thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his, and made thee listen while he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sure, noble Menelaus, thou art mad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such frenzied daring suits not with the time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restrain thyself, though thou hast cause for wrath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor in thy pride of courage meet in arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One so much mightier⁠—Hector, Priam’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom every other chief regards with fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom even Achilles, braver far than thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreads to encounter in the glorious fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withdraw, then, to thy comrades, and sit down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks will send some other champion forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against him; and though fearless, and athirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For combat, he, I deem, will gladly bend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His weary knees to rest should he escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that fierce conflict in the lists alive.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With words like these the Grecian hero changed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purpose of his brother, who obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prudent counsel; and with great delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The attendants stripped the armor from his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Nestor rose amid the Greeks and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye gods! A great calamity hath fallen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Achaia. How the aged chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peleus, the illustrious counsellor and sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who rules the Myrmidons, will now lament!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who once gladly in his palace-home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inquired of me the race and pedigree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Greek warriors. Were he but to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all of them are basely cowering now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Hector’s presence, how would he uplift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands and pray the gods that from his limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parted soul might pass to the abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pluto! Would to Father Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pallas and Apollo that again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I were as young as when the Pylian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Arcadians, mighty with the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fought on the banks of rapid Celadon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And near to Phaea and Iardan’s streams.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There godlike Ereuthalion stood among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our foremost foes, and on his shoulders bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The armor of King Areïthoüs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble Areïthoüs, whom men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And graceful women called the Mace-bearer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For not with bow he fought, nor ponderous lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But broke the phalanxes with iron mace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lycurgus slew him, but by stratagem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not by strength; he from a narrow way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where was no room to wield the iron mace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through Areïthoüs thrust the spear: he fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Backward; the victor took his arms, which Mars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war-god gave, and which in after-time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lycurgus wore on many a battle-field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when within his palace he grew old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave them to be worn by one he loved⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ereuthalion, who attended him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle, and who, wearing them, defied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bravest of our host. All trembled; all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held back in fear, nor dared encounter him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But me a daring trust in my own strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impelled to meet him. I was youngest then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the chiefs; I fought, and Pallas gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victory over him, and thus I slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hugest and most strong of men; he lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Extended in vast bulk upon the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would I were young as then, my frame unworn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By years! And Hector of the beamy helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should meet an adversary soon; but now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one of all the chieftains here, renowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be the bravest of the Achaian race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens to meet in arms the Trojan chief.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus with upbraiding words the old man spake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straight arose nine warriors from their seats.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first was Agamemnon, king of men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The second, brave Tydides Diomed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the chieftains Ajax, bold and strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then Idomeneus, with whom arose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meriones, his armor-bearer, great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Mars himself in battle. After them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eurypylus, Evaemon’s valiant son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thoas, offspring of Androemon, rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the divine Ulysses⁠—claiming all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To encounter noble Hector in the lists.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But then spake Nestor the Gerenian knight:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now let us cast the lot for all, and see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom it falls; for greatly will he aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobly-armed Achaians, and as great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be his share of honor should he come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alive from the hard trial of the fight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then each one marked his lot, and all were cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the helm of Agamemnon, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus. All the people lifted up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hands in prayer to the ever-living gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turned their eyes to the broad heaven, and said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Grant, Father Jove, that Ajax, or the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tydeus, or the monarch who bears rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In rich Mycenae may obtain the lot.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such was their prayer, while the Gerenian knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Nestor, shook the lots; and from the helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaped forth the lot of Ajax, as they wished.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A herald took it, and from right to left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore it through all the assembly, showing it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the leaders of the Greeks. No one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew it, and all disclaimed it. When at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried through all the multitude, it came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ajax the renowned, who had inscribed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid it in the helmet, he stretched forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hand, while at his side the herald stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took and looked upon it, knew his sign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gloried as he looked, and cast it down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the ground before his feet, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends! The lot is mine, and I rejoice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heartily, for I think to overcome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble Hector. Now, while I put on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My armor for the fight, pray ye to Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty son of Saturn, silently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unheard by them of Troy, or else aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since we fear no one. None by strength of arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall vanquish me, or find me inexpert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle, nor was I to that degree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ill-trained in Salamis, where I was born.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and they to Saturn’s monarch-son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prayed, looking up to the broad heaven, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Father Jove! Most mighty, most august!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who rulest from the Idaean mount, vouchsafe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Ajax bear away the victory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And everlasting honor; but if thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost cherish Hector and protect his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give equal strength to both, and equal fame.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such were their words, while Ajax armed himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In glittering brass; and, when about his limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mail was buckled, forward rushed the chief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As moves the mighty Mars to war among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heroes whom the son of Saturn sends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To struggle on the field in murderous strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the great Ajax, bulwark of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a grim smile came forward, and with strides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firm-set and long, and shook his ponderous spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks exulted at the sight; dismay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seized every Trojan: even Hector’s heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quailed in his bosom; yet he might not now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withdraw through fear, nor seek to hide among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The throng of people, since himself had given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The challenge. Ajax, drawing near, upheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A buckler like a rampart, bright with brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strong with ox-hides seven. The cunning hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tychius, skilled beyond all other men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In leather-work, had wrought it at his home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Hyla. He for Ajax framed the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hides of pampered bullocks in seven folds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And an eighth fold of brass⁠—the outside fold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Telamonian Ajax held before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His breast, as he approached, and threatening said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now shalt thou, Hector, singly matched with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learn by what chiefs the Achaian host is led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Besides Achilles, mighty though he be to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break through squadrons, and of lion-heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still in the beaked ships in which he crossed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea he cherishes his wrath against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd of the people⁠—Atreus’ son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we have those that dare defy thee yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they are many. Let the fight begin.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then answered Hector of the plumèd helm:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O high-born Ajax, son of Telamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prince among thy people, think thou not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To treat me like a stripling weak of arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or woman all untrained to tasks of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know what battles are and bloody frays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how to shift to right and left the shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of seasoned hide, and, unfatigued, maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The combat; how on foot to charge the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With steps that move to martial airs, and how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To leap into the chariot and pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war with rushing steeds. Yet not by stealth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek I to smite thee, valiant as thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in fair open battle, if I may.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, brandishing his ponderous lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurled it; and on the outer plate of brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which covered the seven bullock-hides, it struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shield of Ajax. Through the brass and through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six folds of hides the irresistible spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut its swift way, and at the seventh was stopped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then high-born Ajax cast his massive spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turn, and drove it through the fair, round shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam’s son. Through that bright buckler went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rapid weapon, pierced the well-wrought mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tore the linen tunic at the flank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Hector stooped and thus avoided death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They took their spears again, and, coming close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like lions in their hunger, or wild boars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fearful strength, joined battle. Priam’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent his spear forward, striking in the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shield of Ajax, but it broke not through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brass; the metal turned the weapon’s point.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Ajax, springing onward, smote the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector, drave his weapon through, and checked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His enemy’s swift advance, and wounded him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the shoulder, and the black blood flowed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not for this did plumèd Hector cease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From combat, but went back, and, lifting up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A huge, black, craggy stone that near him lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flung it with force against the middle boss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the broad sevenfold shield that Ajax bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brass rang with the blow. Then Ajax raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heavier stone, and whirled it, putting forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arm’s immeasurable strength; it brake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through Hector’s shield as if a millstone’s weight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had fallen. His knees gave way; he fell to earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Headlong; yet still he kept his shield. At once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo raised him up; and now with swords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encountering hand to hand, they both had flown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wound each other, if the heralds sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As messengers from Jupiter and men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not approached⁠—Idaeus from the side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy, Talthybius from the Grecian host⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise ancients both. Betwixt the twain they held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sceptres, and the sage Idaeus spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Cease to contend, dear sons, in deadly fray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye both are loved by cloud-compelling Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both are great in war, as all men know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The night is come; be then the night obeyed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Telamonian Ajax answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Idaeus, first let Hector speak of this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he it was who challenged to the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bravest of the Grecian host, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall willingly obey if he obeys.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To him in turn the plumèd Hector said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ajax, although God gave thee bulk and strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prudence, and in mastery of the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou dost excel the other Greeks, yet now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pause we from battle and the rivalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of prowess for this day. Another time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We haply may renew the fight till fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall part us and bestow the victory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one of us. But now the night is here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it is good to obey the night, that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mayst gladden at the fleet the Greeks and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy friends and comrades, and that I in turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May give the Trojan men and long-robed dames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the great city where King Priam reigns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cause to rejoice⁠—the dames who pray for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thronging the hallowed temple. Let us now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each with the other leave some noble gift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all men, Greek or Trojan, thus may say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘They fought indeed in bitterness of heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they were reconciled, and parted friends.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and gave a silver-studded sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scabbard with its fair embroidered belt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ajax gave a girdle brightly dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With purple. Then they both departed⁠—one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To join the Grecian host, and one to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan people, who rejoiced to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector alive, unwounded, and now safe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the great might and irresistible arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ajax. Straightway to the town they led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him for whose life they scarce had dared to hope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ajax also by the well-armed Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exulting in his feats of arms, was brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To noble Agamemnon. When the chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were in his tents, the monarch sacrificed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bullock of five summers to the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Saturn, sovereign Jupiter. They flayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The carcass, dressed it, carved away the limbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Divided into smaller parts the flesh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixed them on spits, and roasted them with care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drew them from the fire. And when the task</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was finished, and the banquet all prepared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They feasted, and there was no guest who lacked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His equal part in that repast. The son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus, Agamemnon, brave, and lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wide dominions, gave the chine entire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ajax as his due. Now when the calls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thirst and hunger ceased, the aged chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nestor, whose words had ever seemed most wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opened the council with this prudent speech:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Atrides, and ye other chiefs of Greece!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a long-haired warrior of our host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath perished. Cruel Mars hath spilt their blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside Scamander’s gentle stream; their souls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have gone to Hades. Give thou, then, command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the Greeks tomorrow pause from war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And come together at the early dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bring the dead in chariots drawn by mules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oxen, and consume them near our fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fire, that we, when we return from war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May carry to our native land the bones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give them to the children of the slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then will we go forth and heap from earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the plain, a common tomb for all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the funeral pile, and build high towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With speed beside it, which shall be alike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bulwark for our navy and our host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let the entrance be a massive gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through which shall pass an ample chariot-way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a circle on its outer edge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sink we a trench so deep that neither steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor men may pass, if these proud Trojans yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should, in the coming battles, press us sore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the princes all approved his words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile, beside the lofty citadel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilium and at Priam’s palace-gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turbulence and fear the Trojans held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A council, and the wise Antenor spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hearken, ye Trojans, Dardans, and allies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To what my sober judgment bids me speak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send we the Argive Helen back with all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her treasures; let the sons of Atreus lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dame away; for now we wage the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After our faith is broken, and I deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We cannot prosper till we make amends.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and sat him down. The noble chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paris, the fair-haired Helen’s husband, rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To answer him, and spake this wingèd speech:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thy words, Antenor, please me not. Thy skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could offer better counsels. If those words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were gravely meant, the gods have made thee mad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let me here, amid these knights of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak openly my mind. Give up my wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never will; but all the wealth I brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her from Argos I most willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restore, with added treasures of my own.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He said, and took his seat, and in the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dardanian Priam rose, a counsellor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of godlike wisdom, and thus sagely spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear me, ye Trojans, Dardans, and allies!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I speak the thought that rises in my breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take now, as ye are wont, your evening meal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set a watch and keep upon your guard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let Idaeus to the hollow ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repair at morning, and to Atreus’ sons⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Agamemnon and his brother king⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make known what Paris, author of this strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proposes, and with fairly ordered speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask further if they will consent to pause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From cruel battle till we burn the dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then be the war renewed till fate shall part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hosts and give to one the victory.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. The assembly listened and obeyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All through the camp in groups they took their meal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with the morn Idaeus visited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hollow ships, and found the Achaian chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followers of Mars, in council near the prow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Agamemnon’s barque; and, standing there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loud-voiced herald spake his message thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye sons of Atreus, and ye other chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the tribes of Greece, I come to you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Priam and the eminent men of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To say, if it be pleasing to your ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What Alexander, author of the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proposes. All the wealth which in his ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He brought to Troy⁠—would he had perished first!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will, with added treasures of his own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freely restore; but her who was the wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gallant Menelaus he denies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To render back, though all who dwell in Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Join to demand it. I am furthermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bidden to ask if you consent to pause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From cruel battle till we burn our dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then be the war renewed till fate shall part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hosts and give to one the victory.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and all were silent for a space.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then spake at length the valiant Diomed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Let none consent to take the Trojan’s goods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor even Helen; for a child may see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The utter ruin hanging over Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. The admiring Greeks confirmed with shouts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The words of Diomed the knight, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Agamemnon to Idaeus said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Idaeus, thou thyself hast heard the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pronounce their answer. What to them seems good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleases me also. For the slain, I give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consent to burn them; to the dead we bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No hatred; when they fall the rite of fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should soon be paid. Let Juno’s husband, Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Thunderer, bear witness to our truce.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The monarch spake, and raised to all the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sceptre, while Idaeus took his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hallowed Ilium. There in council sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trojans and Dardans, waiting his return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came, and standing in the midst declared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His message. Then they all went forth in haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some to collect the slain and some to fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trees in the forest. From their well-benched ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians also issued, some to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead together, some to gather wood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now from the smooth deep ocean-stream the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to climb the heavens, and with new rays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote the surrounding fields. The Trojans met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But found it hard to know their dead again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They washed away the clotted blood, and laid⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shedding hot tears⁠—the bodies on the cars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And since the mighty Priam’s word forbade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All wailing, silently they bore away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their slaughtered friends, and heaped them on the pyre</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With aching hearts, and, when they had consumed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead with fire, returned to hallowed Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobly-armed Achaians also heaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their slaughtered warriors on the funeral pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With aching hearts; and when they had consumed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their dead with fire they sought their hollow ships.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And ere the morning came, while earth was gray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With twilight, by the funeral pile arose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A chosen band of Greeks, who, going forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaped round it from the earth a common tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all, and built a wall and lofty towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near it⁠—a bulwark for the fleet and host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the wall they fitted massive gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through which there passed an ample chariot-way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on its outer edge they sank a trench⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad, deep⁠—and planted it with pointed stakes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So labored through the night the long-haired Greeks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The gods who sat beside the Thunderer Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Admired the mighty labor of the Greeks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Neptune, he who shakes the earth, began:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Father Jove, henceforth will any one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mortal men consult the immortal gods?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seest thou not how the long-haired Greeks have reared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wall before their navy, and have drawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A trench around it, yet have brought the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No liberal hecatombs? Now will the fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this their work go forth wherever shines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light of day, and men will quite forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wall which once we built with toiling hands⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus Apollo and myself⁠—around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city of renowned Laomedon.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And cloud-compelling Jove in wrath replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Earth-shaking power! What words are these? Some god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of meaner rank and feebler arm than thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might haply dread the work the Greeks have planned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as for thee, thy glory shall be known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherever shines the day; and when at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crested Greeks, departing in their ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall seek their native coasts, do thou o’erthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wall they built, and sink it in the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cover the great shore again with sand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus shall their bulwark vanish from the plain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they with each other while the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was setting. But the Achaians now had brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their labors to an end; they slew their steers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the tents and shared the evening meal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While many ships had come to land with store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wine from Lemnos, which Euneüs sent⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Euneüs whom Hypsipyle brought forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Jason, shepherd of the people. These</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought wine, a thousand measures, as a gift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Agamemnon and his brother king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of Atreus. But the long-haired Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bought for themselves their wines; some gave their brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And others shining steel; some bought with hides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some with steers, and some with slaves, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prepared an ample banquet. Through the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feasted the long-haired Greeks. The Trojan host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their auxiliar warriors banqueted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the city-walls. Through all that night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Great Disposer, Jove, portended woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To both with fearful thunderings. All were pale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With terror; from their beakers all poured wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the ground, and no man dared to drink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had not paid to Saturn’s mighty son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The due libation. Then they laid them down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rest, and so received the balm of sleep.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
