<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 24: The Body of Hector Recovered</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-24" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Body of Hector Recovered</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">A council of the gods⁠—Thetis sent to make Achilles willing to restore the body of Hector to his friends⁠—Iris sent to Priam, bidding him go in person to Achilles and ask for the body⁠—Visit of Priam made by night to the tent of Achilles, who is moved by his entreaties and magnificent presents to deliver up the remains of his son⁠—Departure of Priam by night with the body from the tent of Achilles⁠—Lament of Andromache, Hector, and Helen over the dead⁠—The funeral of Hector, with which the poem closes.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>The assembly was dissolved, the people all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dispersed to their swift galleys, and prepared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With food and gentle slumber to refresh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their wearied frames. But still Achilles wept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering his dear comrade. Sleep, whose sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is over all, came not; he turned and tossed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still yearning for his strong and valiant friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus. All that they had ever done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together, all the hardships they had borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battles fought with heroes, the wild seas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erpassed, came thronging on his memory.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shed warm tears, as now upon his sides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now on his back, now on his face he lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, starting from his couch, he wandered forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sorrow by the margin of the deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor did the morn that rose o’er sea and shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dawn unperceived by him; for then he yoked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fleet steeds to the chariot, and made fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corse of Hector, that it might be dragged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the wheels. Three times around the tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Menoetiades he dragged the slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then turned and sought his tent, again to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left him there stretched out amid the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the face downward. Yet Apollo, moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pity for the hero, kept him free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From soil or stain, though dead, and o’er him held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The golden aegis, lest, when roughly dragged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the ground, the body might be torn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So in his anger did Achilles treat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unworthily the noble Hector’s corse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blessed gods themselves with pity looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the slain, and bade the vigilant one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Argus-queller, bear him thence by stealth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This counsel pleased the immortals all, except</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Juno and Neptune and the blue-eyed maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these persisted in their wrath. To them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilium, the hallowed city, and its king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Priam, and all his people, from the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were hateful; ’t was for Alexander’s fault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Affronting the two goddesses what time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sought his cottage, and preferring her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who ministered to his calamitous love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, when the twelfth morning from that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose, Apollo spake among the gods:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Cruel are ye, O gods, and prone to wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For was not Hector wont before your shrines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To burn the thighs of chosen bulls and goats?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now that he is dead ye venture not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rescue him, and let his wife and son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mother and King Priam look again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his face. Soon would they light the pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And burn the dead, and pay the funeral rite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye seek to favor, O ye gods, that pest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, in whose breast there dwells no love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of justice, nor a temper to be moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By prayers, but who delights in savage deeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as a lion, conscious of vast strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scornful of resistance, falls upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd’s flock, and slays for his repast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus with Achilles neither mercy dwells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shame, which often profits, often harms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mankind. For when another man has met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A greater grief than he⁠—has lost, perchance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A brother or a son⁠—he dries at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tears, and ceases to lament; for fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestows the power to suffer patiently.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this Achilles, after he has spoiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The godlike Hector of his life in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath bound him to his chariot, and hath dragged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corse around his dear companion’s tomb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unseemly is the deed, and small will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The good it brings him. Brave although he be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We may be angry with him when he thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insults a portion of insensible earth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The white-armed Juno was incensed, and spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“So mightst thou say, God of the silver bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were equal honor to Achilles due</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hector. Hector is a mortal man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suckled at a woman’s breast. Not so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles; he was born of one of us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A goddess whom I nurtured and brought up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave to Peleus. Ye were present all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye gods, when they were wedded. Thou wert there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To share the marriage banquet, harp in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou plotter with the vile, thou faithless one!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then answered cloud-compelling Jove, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let not thy anger rise against the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Juno, for the honor of the chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not be equal. Yet of all the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mortals dwelling in the city of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Hector dearest to the gods; to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ever was; and never did he fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To offer welcome gifts. My altar ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lacked fitting feast, libation, and the fume</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of incense⁠—hallowed rites which are our due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet seek we not to steal away the corse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of valiant Hector; that we could not do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without his slayer’s knowledge, who by night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And day is ever near to him and keeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watch o’er him like a mother. Let some god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call hither Thetis. I will counsel her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prudently, that Achilles may receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ransom from Priam, and restore his son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ceased, and with the swiftness of the storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose Iris up, to be his messenger.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half way ’twixt Samos and the rugged coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Imbrus down she plunged to the dark sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entering the deep with noise. Far down she sank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As sinks the ball of lead, that, sliding o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wild bull’s horn, bears into ocean’s depths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death to the greedy fishes. There she found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thetis within her roomy cave, among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goddesses of ocean, seated round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In full assembly. Thetis in the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bewailed the fate of her own blameless son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About to perish on the fertile soil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy, and far from Greece. The swift of wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iris, approached her and addressed her thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Arise, O Thetis. Father Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose counsel stands forever, sends for thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And silver-footed Thetis answered him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why should that potent deity require</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My presence, who have many griefs, and shrink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From mingling with immortals? Yet I go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perforce, for never doth he speak in vain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the goddess-queen, and, speaking, took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her mantle⁠—darker web was never worn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And onward went. Wind-footed Iris led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The way; the waters of the sea withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either side. They climbed the steepy shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took their way to heaven. They found the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Saturn, him of the far-sounding voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the blessed, ever-living gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assembled round him. Close to Father Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She took her seat, for Pallas yielded it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Juno put a beautiful cup of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into her hand, and spake consoling words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She drank and gave it back, and thus began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father of immortals and of men:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou comest to Olympus, though in grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O goddess Thetis, and I know the cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes thee sad and will not from thy thoughts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet let me now declare why I have called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee hither. For nine days the immortal gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have been at strife concerning Hector’s corse us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Peleus’ son, the spoiler. They have asked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vigilant Argus-queller to remove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead by stealth. But I must yet bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh honor on Achilles, and thus keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy love and reverence. Now descend at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the camp and carry to thy son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My message: say that it offends the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And me the most, that in his spite he keeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corse of Hector at the beaked ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refusing to restore it. He perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will listen, and, revering me, give back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slain. And I will send a messenger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iris, to large-souled Priam, bidding him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten in person to the Grecian fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ransom his beloved son, and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles gifts that shall appease his rage.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: the goddess of the silver feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thetis, obeyed, and with precipitate flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descended from the mountain-peaks. She came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her son’s tent, and found him uttering moans</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Continually, while his beloved friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were busy round him; they prepared a feast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had just slain within the tent a ewe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ample size and fleece. She took her seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside her son, and smoothed his brow, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How long, my son, wilt thou lament and grieve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pine at heart, abstaining from the feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from thy couch? Yet well it is to seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A woman’s love. Thy life will not be spared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long time to me, for death and cruel fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand near thee. Listen to me; I am come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A messenger from Jove, who bids me say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The immortals are offended, and himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The most, that thou shouldst in thy spite detain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corse of Hector at the beaked ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refusing its release. Comply thou then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take the ransom and restore the dead.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus Achilles, swift of foot, replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let him who brings the ransom come and take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The body, if it be the will of Jove.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus did the mother and the son confer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the galleys, and between them passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a wingèd word, while Saturn’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade Iris go with speed to sacred Troy:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fleet Iris, haste thee. Leave the Olympian seats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And send magnanimous Priam to the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ransom his dear son, and bear him back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ilium. Let him carry gifts to calm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The anger of Achilles. He should go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, no Trojan with him, save a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In years, a herald, who may guide the mules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strong-wheeled chariot, harnessed to bear back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him whom the great Achilles has o’erthrown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let him fear not death nor other harm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we will send a guide to lead him safe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Argus-queller, till he stand beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles; and when once he comes within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warrior’s tent, Achilles will not raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hand to slay, but will restrain the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor mad, nor rash, nor criminal is he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will humanely spare a suppliant man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Iris, the swift messenger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose feet are like the wind, went forth with speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came to Priam’s palace, where she found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorrow and wailing. Round the father sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sons within the hall, and steeped with tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their garments. In the midst the aged man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat with a cloak wrapped round him, and much dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strewn on his head and neck, which, when he rolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the earth, he gathered with his hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His daughters and the consorts of his sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with their cries the mansion, sorrowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For those, the many and brave, who now lay slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Grecian hands. The ambassadress of Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood beside Priam, and in soft, low tones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his limbs shook with fear, addressed him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Be comforted, and have no fear; for I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am come, Dardanian Priam, not to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mischief, but blessing. I am sent to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A messenger from Jove, who, though afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pities thee and will aid thee. He who rules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Olympus bids thee ransom thy slain son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble Hector, carrying gifts to calm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The anger of Achilles. Thou shouldst go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, no Trojan with thee, save a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In years, a herald, who shall guide the mules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strong-wheeled chariot, harnessed to bring back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him whom the great Achilles has o’erthrown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have no fear of death or other harm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A guide shall go with thee to lead thee safe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Argus-queller, till thou stand beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, and when once thou art within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warrior’s tent, Achilles will not raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hand to slay, but will restrain the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is not mad, nor rash, nor prone to crime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will humanely spare a suppliant man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus the swift-footed Iris spake, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Departed. Priam bade his sons prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strong-wheeled chariot, drawn by mules, and bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A coffer on it. He descended next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a fragrant chamber, cedar-lined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-roofed, and stored with many things of price,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And calling Hecuba, his wife, he said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dear wife, a message from Olympian Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commands that I betake me to the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thence redeem my slaughtered son with gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That may appease Achilles. Tell me now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How this may seem to thee? for I am moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a strong impulse to approach the ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And venture into the great Grecian camp.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: his consort wept, and answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ah me! the prudence which was once so praised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By strangers and by those who own thy sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where is it now? Why wouldst thou go alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Greek fleet, to meet the eye of him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who slew so many of thy gallant sons?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An iron heart is thine. If that false man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remorseless as he is, should see thee there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seize thee, neither pity nor respect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou to hope from him. Let us lament</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Hector in these halls. A cruel fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spun, when I brought him forth, his thread of life⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That far from us his corse should feed the hounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near that fierce man, whose liver I could tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out his bosom. Then the indignities</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Done to my son would be repaid, for he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was slain, not shunning combat, coward-like,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But fighting to defend the men of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the deep-bosomed Trojan dames. He fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without a thought of flight or of retreat.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the aged, godlike king rejoined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Keep me not back from going, nor be thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bird of evil omen in these halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou shalt not persuade me. This I say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If any of the dwellers of the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soothsayer, seer, or priest, had said to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I have heard, I well might deem the words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lie, and heed them not. But since I heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself the mandate from a deity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw her face to face, I certainly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will go, nor shall the message be in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And should it be my fate to perish there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the galleys of the mail-clad Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So be it; for Achilles will forthwith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put me to death embracing my poor son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And satisfying my desire to weep.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, raising the fair coffer-lids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took out twelve robes of state most beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve single cloaks, as many tapestried mats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tunics next and mantles twelve of each,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ten whole talents of pure gold, which first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He weighed. Two burnished tripods from his store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He added, and four goblets and a cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of eminent beauty, which the men of Thrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave him when, as an envoy to their coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came from Troy⁠—a sumptuous gift, and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged king reserved not even this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To deck his palace, such was his desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ransom his dear son. And then he drave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away the Trojans hovering round his porch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rebuking them with sharp and bitter words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hence with you, worthless wretches! have ye not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorrow enough at home, that ye are come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To vex me thus? Or doth it seem to you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of little moment, that Saturnian Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath sent such grief upon me in the loss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my most valiant son? Ye yet will know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How great that loss has been; for it will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lighter task for the beleaguering Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To work our ruin, now that he is dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I shall sink to Hades ere mine eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold the city sacked and made a spoil.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and with his staff he chased away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loiterers; forth before the aged man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They went. With like harsh words he chid his sons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helenus, Paris, noble Agathon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pammon, Antiphonus, Deïphobus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polites, great in war, Hippothoüs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gallant Dios, nine in all he called,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus bespake them with reproachful words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Make haste, ye idle fellows, my disgrace!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would ye had all been slain beside the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of Hector! Woe is me! the most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhappy of mankind am I, who had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bravest sons in all the town of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none of them, I think, are left to me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mestor, divine in presence, Troilus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gallant knight, and Hector, he who looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A god among his countrymen⁠—no son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of man he seemed, but of immortal birth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those Mars has slain, but these who are my shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remain⁠—these liars, dancers, excellent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In choirs, whose trade is public robbery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lambs and kids. Why haste ye not to get</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My chariot ready, and bestow these things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within it, that my journey may begin?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and they, in fear of his rebuke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifted from out its place the strong-wheeled car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Framed to be drawn by mules, and beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And newly built, and on it they made fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coffer. From its pin they next took down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boxwood mule-yoke, fitted well with rings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And carved with a smooth boss. With this they brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A yoke-band nine ells long, which carefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adjusting to the polished pole’s far end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They cast the ring upon the bolt, and thrice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wound the long band on each side of the bolt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the yoke, and made it fast, and turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loose ends under. Then they carried forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The treasures that should ransom Hector’s corse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And having piled them in the polished car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They yoked the hardy, strong-hoofed mules which once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Mysians gave to Priam, princely gifts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear the yoke of Priam they led forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horses which the aged man himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fed at the polished manger. These the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yoked, aided by the herald, while in mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the palace court, they both revolved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their prudent counsels. Hecuba, the queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to them in deep sorrow. In her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She bore a golden cup of delicate wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they might make libations and depart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stood before the steeds, and thus she spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Take this, and pour to Father Jove, and pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou mayst safely leave the enemy’s camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For home, since’t is thy will, though I dissuade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To go among the ships. Implore thou then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The god of Ida and the gatherer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the black tempest, Saturn’s son, who looks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down on all Troy, to send his messenger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His swift and favorite bird, of matchless strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thy right hand, that, with thine eye on him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou mayst with courage journey to the ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Greek horsemen. But if Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All-seeing should withhold his messenger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot bid thee, eager as thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adventure near the galleys of the Greeks.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the godlike Priam made reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dear wife, indeed, I will not disobey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy counsel; meet it is to raise our hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Jove, and ask him to be merciful.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and bade the attendant handmaid pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure water on his hands, for near him stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A maid who came and held a basin forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ewer. When his hands were washed, he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goblet from the queen, and then, in prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood in the middle of the court, and poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wine, and, looking heavenward, spake aloud:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Father Jove, most glorious and most great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who rulest all from Ida, let me find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Favor and pity with Achilles. Send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A messenger, thy own swift, favorite bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of matchless strength, on my right hand, that I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beholding him, may confidently pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the fleet of the Greek horsemen lies!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus in his prayer he spake, and Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The All-disposer, hearkened, and sent forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An eagle, bird of surest augury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Named the Black Chaser, and by others called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Percnos, with wings as broad as is the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skilfully fashioned for the lofty hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some rich man, and fastened with a bolt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such ample wings he spread on either side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As townward on the right they saw him fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They saw and they rejoiced; their hearts grew light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within their bosoms. Then the aged king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to mount the polished car, and drave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through vestibule and echoing porch. The mules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harnessed to draw the four-wheeled car, went first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven by the sage Idaeus; after them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horses, urged by Priam with the lash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rapidly through the city. All his friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed lamenting, as for one who went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet his death. And now when they had reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plain descending from the town, the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sons-in-law of Priam all returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ilium, and the twain proceeded on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not unmarked by all-beholding Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, moved with pity for the aged man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned to his well-beloved son and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hermes, who more than any other god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delightest to consort with human kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And willingly dost listen to their prayers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste, guide King Priam to the Grecian fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet so that none may see him, and no Greek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know of his coming, till he stand before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides.” Thus he spake: the messenger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who slew the Argus hearkened and obeyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hastily beneath his feet he bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair, ambrosial, golden sandals worn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear him over ocean like the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er the boundless land. His wand he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith he seals in sleep the eyes of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And opens them at will. With this in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty Argus-queller flew, and soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was at the Troad and the Hellespont.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to some royal stripling seemed the god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In youth’s first prime, when youth has most of grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there the Trojans twain, when they had passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tomb of Ilus, halted with their mules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And horses, that the beasts might drink the stream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For twilight now was creeping o’er the earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herald looked, and saw that Mercury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was near, and thus, addressing Priam, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Be on thy guard, O son of Dardanus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For here is cause for wariness. I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A warrior, and I think he seeks our lives.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let us urge our steeds and fly, or else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descend and clasp his knees, and sue for grace.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and greatly was the aged king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bewildered by his words; with hair erect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood, and motionless, while Mercury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew near, and took the old man’s hand, and asked:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Whither, O father, guidest thou thy mules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And steeds in the dim night, while others sleep?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearest thou nothing from the warlike Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy foes, who hate thee, and are near at hand?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should one of them behold thee bearing off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These treasures in the swiftly darkening night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wouldst thou do? Thou art not young, and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who comes with thee is old; ye could not make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defence against the foe. Fear nought from me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will save thee, since thou art so like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my own father, from all other harm.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Priam, the godlike ancient, answered thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou sayest true, dear son; but sure some god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holds over me his kind, protecting hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sends a guide like thee to join me here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So noble art thou both in form and air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gracious are thy thoughts, and blessed they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who gave thee birth.” With that the messenger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Argus-queller, spake again, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Most wisely hast thou spoken, aged man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But tell, and truly, why thou bearest hence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This store of treasures among stranger men?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it that they may be preserved for thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or are ye all deserting in alarm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your hallowed Troy? for such a man of might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was thy brave son who died, that I may say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks in battle had no braver man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Priam, godlike ancient, spake in turn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who then art thou, and of what parents born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excellent youth, who dost in such kind words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak of the death of my unhappy son?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The herald, Argus-queller, answered him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I see that thou wouldst prove me, aged man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By questions touching Hector, whom I oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have seen with mine own eyes in glorious fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Putting the Greeks to rout and slaying them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By their swift ships with that sharp spear of his.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We stood and marvelled, for Achilles, wroth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Agamemnon, would not suffer us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To join the combat. I attend on him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same good galley brought us to this shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am one among his Myrmidons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polyctor is my father, who is rich,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now as old as thou. Six are his sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside me, I the seventh. In casting lots</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With them, it fell to me that I should come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ilium with Achilles. I am here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In coming from the fleet, for with the dawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark-eyed Greeks are planning to renew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war around the city. They have grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impatient of long idleness; their chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek vainly to restrain their warlike rage.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the godlike ancient, Priam, thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If thou indeed dost serve Pelides, tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And truly tell me, whether yet my son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is at the fleet, or has Achilles cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Torn limb from limb, his body to the hounds?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The herald, Argus-queller, thus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O aged monarch, neither have the hounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devoured thy son, nor yet the birds of prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But near the galleys of Achilles still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lies neglected and among the tents.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve mornings have beheld him lying there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor hath corruption touched him, nor the worms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That make the slain their feast begun to feed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘T is true that, when the holy morning dawns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles drags him fiercely round the tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his dear friend; yet that disfigures not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead. Shouldst thou approach him, thou wouldst see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With marvelling eyes how fresh and dewy still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The body lies, the blood all cleansed away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unsoiled in every part, and all the wounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closed up wherever made; for many a spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was thrust into his sides. Thus tenderly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blessed gods regard thy son, though dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For dearly was he loved by them in life.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the aged man was comforted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said: “ ‘T is meet, O son, that we should pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oblations to the immortals; for my son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet alive neglected not within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His palace the due worship of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dwell upon Olympus; therefore they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are mindful of him, even after death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take this magnificent goblet; be my guard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And guide me, by the favor of the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until I reach Pelides in his tent.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again the herald, Argus-queller, spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou seekest yet to try me, aged man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who younger am than thou. Yet think thou not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I, without the knowledge of my chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will take thy gifts; for in my heart I fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, nor would wrong him in the least,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest evil come upon me. Yet I go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Willingly with thee, as thy faithful guide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were it as far as Argos the renowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a swift galley, or on foot by land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet none would dare to harm thee while with me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Hermes spake, and leaped into the car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took into his hands the lash and reins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And breathed into the horses and the mules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh vigor. Coming to the wall and trench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the ships, they found the guard engaged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their night-meal. The herald Argicide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured sleep upon them all, and quickly flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gates apart, and pushed aside the bars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And led in Priam, with the costly gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaped on the car. They went until they reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lofty tent in which Achilles sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reared by the Myrmidons to lodge their king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With timbers of hewn fir, and over-roofed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thatch, for which the meadows had been mown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fenced for safety round with rows of stakes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One fir-tree bar made fast its gate, which three</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong Greeks were wont to raise aloft, and three</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were needed to take down the massive beam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles wielded the vast weight alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneficent Hermes opened it before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged man, and brought the treasures in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Designed for swift Achilles. Then he left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The car and stood upon the ground, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O aged monarch, I am Mercury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ever-living god; my father, Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade me attend thy journey. I shall now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return, nor must Achilles look on me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not meet that an immortal god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should openly befriend a mortal man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter, approach Pelides, clasp his knees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entreat him by his father, and his son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fair-haired mother; so shall he be moved.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having spoken, Hermes took his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the Olympian summit. Priam then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang from the chariot to the ground. He left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idaeus there to guard the steeds and mules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, hastening to the tent where, dear to Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles lodged, he found the chief within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his companions sat apart, save two⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Automedon the brave, and Alcimus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who claimed descent from Mars. These stood near by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ministered to Peleus’ son, who then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was closing a repast, and had just left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The food and wine, and still the table stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmarked the royal Priam entered in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, coming to Achilles, clasped his knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kissed those fearful slaughter-dealing hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By which so many of his sons had died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as, when some blood-guilty man, whose hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own land has slain a fellow-man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flees to another country, and the abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some great chieftain, all men look on him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Astonished⁠—so, when godlike Priam first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was seen, Achilles was amazed, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked on each other, wondering at the sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus King Priam supplicating spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Think of thy father, an old man like me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Godlike Achilles! On the dreary verge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of closing life he stands, and even now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haply is fiercely pressed by those who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him, and has none to shield his age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From war and its disasters. Yet his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoices when he hears thou yet dost live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every day he hopes that his dear son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will come again from Troy. My lot is hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I was father of the bravest sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all wide Troy, and none are left me now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fifty were with me when the men of Greece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrived upon our coast; nineteen of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Owned the same mother, and the rest were born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my palaces. Remorseless Mars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already had laid lifeless most of these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hector, whom I cherished most, whose arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defended both our city and ourselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him didst thou lately slay while combating</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his dearcountry. For his sake I come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Greek fleet, and to redeem his corse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I bring uncounted ransom. O, revere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods, Achilles, and be merciful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calling to mind thy father! happier he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than I; for I have borne what no man else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That dwells on earth could bear⁠—have laid my lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the hand of him who slew my son.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake: Achilles sorrowfully thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his own father. By the hand he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suppliant, and with gentle force removed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man from him. Both in memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those they loved were weeping. The old king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many tears, and rolling in the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before Achilles, mourned his gallant son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles sorrowed for his father’s sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then bewailed Patroclus, and the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lamentation filled the tent. At last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, when he felt his heart relieved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By tears, and that strong grief had spent its force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang from his seat; then lifting by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged man, and pitying his white head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his white chin, he spake these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Great have thy sufferings been, unhappy king!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How couldst thou venture to approach alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Grecian fleet, and show thyself to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who slew so many of thy valiant sons?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An iron heart is thine. But seat thyself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let us, though afflicted grievously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Allow our woes to sleep awhile, for grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indulged can bring no good. The gods ordain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lot of man to suffer, while themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are free from care. Beside Jove’s threshold stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two casks of gifts for man. One cask contains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The evil, one the good, and he to whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Thunderer gives them mingled sometimes falls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into misfortune, and is sometimes crowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blessings. But the man to whom he gives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The evil only stands a mark exposed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wrong, and, chased by grim calamity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wanders the teeming earth, alike unloved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By gods and men. So did the gods bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Munificent gifts on Peleus from his birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For eminent was he among mankind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For wealth and plenty; o’er the Myrmidons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ruled, and, though a mortal, he was given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A goddess for a wife. Yet did the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Add evil to the good, for not to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was born a family of kingly sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his house, successors to his reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One short-lived son is his, nor am I there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cherish him in his old age; but here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do I remain, far from my native land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Troy, and causing grief to thee and thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thee too, aged king, they speak, as one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose wealth was large in former days, when all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Lesbos, seat of Macar, owns was thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all in Phrygia and the shores that bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Hellespont; men said thou didst excel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All others in thy riches and thy sons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But since the gods have brought this strife on thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War and perpetual slaughter of brave men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are round thy city. Yet be firm of heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor grieve forever. Sorrow for thy son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will profit nought; it cannot bring the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To life again, and while thou dost afflict</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thyself for him fresh woes may fall on thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the godlike Priam, aged king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made answer: “Bid me not be seated here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nursling of Jove, while Hector lies among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy tents unburied. Let me ransom him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once, that I may look on him once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my own eyes. Receive the many gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We bring thee, and mayst thou possess them long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reach thy native shore, since by thy grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I live and yet behold the light of day.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Achilles heard, and, frowning, thus rejoined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Anger me not, old man; ’t was in my thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To let thee ransom Hector. To my tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mother came who bore me, sent from Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughter of the Ancient of the Sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I perceive, nor can it be concealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Priam, that some god hath guided thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To our swift galleys; for no mortal man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though in his prime of youthful strength, would dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To come into the camp; he could not pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guard, nor move the beams that bar our gates.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So then remind me of my griefs no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest, suppliant as thou art, I leave thee not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unharmed, and thus transgress the laws of Jove.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: the aged man in fear obeyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then Pelides like a lion leaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth from the door, yet not alone he went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For of his comrades two⁠—Automedon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero, and his comrade Alcimus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He whom Achilles held in most esteem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the slain Patroclus⁠—followed him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mules and horses they unyoked, and led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged monarch’s clear-voiced herald in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade him sit. Then from the polished car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They took the costly ransom of the corse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector, save two cloaks, which back they laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a fair tunic, that their chief might give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The body shrouded to be borne to Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he called the maidens, bidding them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wash and anoint the dead, yet far apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Priam, lest, with looking on his son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grief within his heart might rise uncurbed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To anger, and Achilles in his rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might stay him and transgress the laws of Jove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the handmaids finished, having washed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The body and anointed it with oil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wrapped a sumptuous cloak and tunic round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The limbs, Achilles lifted it himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And placed it on a bier. His comrades gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their aid, and raised it to the polished car.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all was done, Achilles groaned, and called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By name the friend he dearly loved, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O my Patroclus, be not wroth with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou in Hades hear that I restore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector to his dear father, since I take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ransom not unworthy; but of this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I yield to thee the portion justly thine.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the godlike warrior, and withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his tent, and took the princely seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which he had arisen, opposite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that of Priam, whom he thus bespake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Behold thy son is ransomed, aged man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou hast asked, and lies upon his bier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt behold him with the early dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear him hence. Now let us break our fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For even Niobe, the golden-haired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refrained not from her food, though children twelve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perished within her palace⁠—six young sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And six fair daughters. Phoebus slew the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With arrows from his silver bow, incensed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Niobe, while Dian, archer queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck down the daughters; for the mother dared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make herself the peer of rosy-cheeked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Latona, who, she boastfully proclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had borne two children only, while herself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had brought forth many. Yet, though only two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The children of Latona took the lives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all her own. Nine days ihe corses lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In blood, and there was none to bury them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Jove had changed the dwellers of the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stone; but on the tenth the gods of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave burial to the dead. Yet Niobe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though spent with weeping long, did not refrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From food. And now forever mid the rocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And desert hills of Sipylus, where lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fame says, the couches of the goddess-nymphs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who lead the dance where Acheloüs flows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although she be transformed to stone, she broods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the woes inflicted by the gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, O noble Ancient, let us sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At our repast, and thou mayst afterward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mourn thy beloved son, while bearing him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homeward, to be bewailed with many tears.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Achilles, the swift-footed, spake, and left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His seat, and, slaying a white sheep, he bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrades flay and dress it. Then they carved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flesh in portions which they fixed on spits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roasted carefully, and drew them back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then Automedon distributed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bread in shapely canisters around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The table, while Achilles served the flesh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all put forth their hands and shared the feast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when their thirst and hunger were appeased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dardanian Priam fixed a wondering look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Achilles, who in nobleness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of form was like the gods. Achilles fixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A look of equal wonder on his guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dardanian Priam, for he much admired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His gracious aspect and his pleasant speech.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when at length they both withdrew their gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Priam, the godlike Ancient, spake, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nursling of Jove, dismiss me speedily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rest, that we may lie, and be refreshed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gentle slumbers. Never have these eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been closed beneath their lids, since by thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Hector lost his life; and evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I mourn and cherish all my griefs, and writhe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the ground within my palace courts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I have taken food at last, and drunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draughts of red wine, untasted till this hour.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Achilles bade the attending men and maids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Place couches in the porch, and over them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw sumptuous purple mats on which to lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embroidered tapestries, and on each of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread a broad, fleecy mantle, covering all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth went the train with torches in their hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quickly spread two couches. Then the swift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles pleasantly to Priam said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sleep, excellent old man, without the tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest some one of our counsellors arrive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as oft come within my tent to sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And talk of warlike matters. Seeing thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dark hours of night, he might relate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tale to Agamemnon, king of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hinder thus the ransom of thy son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But say, and truly say, how many days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Requirest thou to pay the funeral rites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To noble Hector, so that I may rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As many, and restrain the troops from war.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then answered godlike Priam, aged king:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Since, then, thou wilt, Achilles, that we pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rites of burial to my noble son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I own the favor. Well thou knowest how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We Trojans are constrained to keep within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city walls, for it is far to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wood from the mountains, and we fear to dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The journey. Nine days would we mourn the dea!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within our dwellings, and upon the tenth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would bury him, and make a solemn feast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the next day would rear his monument,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the twelfth, if needful, fight again.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And swift Achilles, godlike chief, rejoined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be it, O reverend Priam, as thou wilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for that space will I delay the war.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and that the aged king might feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No fear, he grasped his right hand at the wrist;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then King Priam and the herald went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sleep within the porch, but wary still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles slumbered in his stately tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rosy-cheeked Briseis at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the other gods and men who fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In chariots gave themselves to slumber, save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneficent Hermes; sleep came not to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For still he meditated how to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Priam back from the Achaian fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unnoticed by the watchers at the gate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So at the monarch’s head he stood, and spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O aged king, thou givest little heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To danger, sleeping thus amid thy foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because Achilles spares thee. Thou hast paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large ransom for thy well-beloved son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet the sons whom thou hast left in Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would pay three times that ransom for thy life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should Agamemnon, son of Atreus, learn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or any of the Greeks⁠—that thou art here.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: the aged king in fear awaked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herald. Hermes yoked the steeds and mules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drave them quickly through the camp unmarked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By any there. But when they reached the ford</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Xanthus, progeny of Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolls the smooth eddies of his stream, the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deputed for the Olympian height, and Morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In saffron robes o’erspread the Earth with light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Townward they urged the steeds, and as they went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorrowed and wailed: the mules conveyed the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they were seen by none of all the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And graceful dames of Troy save one alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cassandra, beautiful as Venus, stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Pergamus, and from its height discerned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her wither, standing on the chariot-seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knew the herald, him whose voice so oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Summoned the citizens, and knew the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretched on a litter drawn by mules. She raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her voice, and called to all the city thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Trojan men and women, hasten forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look on Hector, if ye e’er rejoiced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see him coming from the field alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pride of Troy, and all who dwell in her.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and suddenly was neither man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor woman left within the city bounds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep grief was on them all; they went to meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near to the gates, the monarch bringing home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead. And first the wife whom Hector loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed with his reverend mother to the car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it rolled on, and, plucking out their hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched with their hands the forehead of the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While round it pressed the multitude, and wept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would have wept before the gates all day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to the set of sun, in bitter grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Hector’s loss, had not the aged man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Addressed the people from his chariot-seat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Give place to me, and let the mules pass on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ye may weep your fill when once the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is laid within the palace.” As he spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The throng gave way and let the chariot pass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And having brought it to the royal halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a fair couch they laid the corse, and placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singers beside it, leaders of the dirge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sang a sorrowful, lamenting strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the women answered it with sobs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White-armed Andromache in both her hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took warlike Hector’s head, and over it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began the lamentation midst them all:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou hast died young, my husband, leaving me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this thy home a widow, and one son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An infant yet. To an unhappy pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He owes his birth, and never will, I fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bloom into youth; for ere that day will Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be overthrown, since thou, its chief defence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art dead, the guardian of its walls and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its noble matrons and its speechless babes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet to be carried captive far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I among them, in the hollow barks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, my son, wilt either go with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thou shalt toil at menial tasks for some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pitiless master; or perhaps some Greek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will seize thy little arm, and in his rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will hurl thee from a low^r and dash thee dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering how thy lather, Hector, slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother, son, or father; for the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector forced full many a Greek to bite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dust of earth. Not slow to smite was he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fierce conflict; therefore all who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the city sorrow for his fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou bringest an unutterable grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Hector, on thy parents, and on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sharpest sorrows. Thou didst not stretch forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy hands to me, in dying, from thy couch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor speak a word to comfort me, which I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might ever think of night and day with tears.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the weeping wife: the women all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingled their wail with hers, and Hecuba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took up the passionate lamentation next:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Hector, thou who wert most fondly loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all my sons! While yet thou wert alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear wert thou to the gods, who even now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When death has overtaken thee, bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such care upon thee. All my other sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom swift Achilles took in war he sold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Samos, Imbrus, by the barren sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lemnos harborless. But as for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he had taken with his cruel spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy life, he dragged thee round and round the tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his young friend, Patroclus, whom thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had slain, yet raised he not by this the dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now thou liest in the palace here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh and besprinkled as with early dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like one just slain with silent arrows aimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Phoebus, bearer of the silver bow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Weeping she spake, and woke in all who heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grief without measure. Helen, last of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took up the lamentation, and began:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Hector, who wert dearest to my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all my husband’s brothers⁠—for the wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am I of godlike Paris, him whose fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought me to Troy⁠—would I had sooner died.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the twentieth year is past since first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I came a stranger from my native shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet have I never heard from thee a word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of anger or reproach. And when the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam, and his daughters, and the wives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam’s sons, in all their fair array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taunted me grievously, or Hecuba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herself⁠—for Priam ever was to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gracious father⁠—thou didst take my part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With kindly admonitions, and restrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their tongues with soft address and gentle words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore my heart is grieved, and I bewail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee and myself at once⁠—unhappy me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now I have no friend in all wide Troy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None to be kind to me: they hate me all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Weeping she spake: the mighty throng again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered with wailing. Priam then addressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people: “Now bring wood, ye men of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the city. Let there be no fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ambush from the Greeks, for when of late</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I left Achilles at the dark-hulled barks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave his promise to molest no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men of Troy till the twelfth morn shall rise.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and speedily they yoked the mules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oxen to the wains, and came in throngs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the city walls. Nine days they toiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring the trunks of trees, and when the tenth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose to light the abodes of men, they brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corse of valiant Hecfor from the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many tears, and laid it on the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High up, and flung the fire to light the pile.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now when the early rosy-fingered Dawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked forth, the people gathered round the pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of glorious Hector. When they all had come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together, first they quenched the funeral fires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherever they had spread, with dark-red wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then his brothers and companions searched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the white bones. In sorrow and in tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That streaming stained their cheeks, they gathered them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And placed them in a golden um. O’er this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They drew a covering of soft purple robes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid it in a hollow grave, and piled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fragments of rock above it, many and huge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste they reared the tomb, with sentries set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On every side, lest all too soon the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should come in armor to renew the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When now the tomb was built, the multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returned, and in the halls where Priam dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nursling of Jove, were feasted royally.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was the mighty Hector’s burial rite.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
