<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 16: The Sixth Battle⁠—Death of Patroclus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-16" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Sixth Battle⁠—Death of Patroclus</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Patroclus permitted by Achilles to take part in the war, on condition that he will return after repulsing the Trojans from the fleet⁠—His preparations for the battle, putting on the armor of Achilles, and summoning the Myrmidons to follow him⁠—Alarm of the Trojans on seeing him, supposing him to be Achilles⁠—His exploits⁠—The Trojans driven back from the Fleet⁠—Death of Sarpedon⁠—The Trojans pursued by Patroclus, contrary to the command of Achilles, to the walls of Troy⁠—Patroclus disarmed by Apollo, wounded by Euphorbus, and slain by Hector.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Such was the struggle for that gallant barque.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile Patroclus stood beside his friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd of the people, Peleus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shed hot tears, as when a fountain sheds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark waters streaming down a precipice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great Achilles, swift of foot, beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pitied him, and spake these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why weepest thou, Patroclus, like a girl⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little girl that by her mother’s side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Runs, importuning to be taken up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plucks her by the robe, and stops her way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looks at her, and cries, until at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She rests within her arms? Thou art like her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus, with thy tears. Dost thou then bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad tidings to the Myrmidons or me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hast thou news from Phthia? It is said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That still Menoetius, son of Actor, lives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Peleus also, son of Aeacus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Myrmidons. Full bitterly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should we lament to hear that either died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or mournest thou because the Achaians fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through their own folly by the roomy ships?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak, and hide nothing, for I too would know.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thou, O knight Patroclus, with a sigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep drawn, didst answer thus: “Be not displeased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, son of Peleus, bravest far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the Achaian army! for the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endure a bitter lot. The chiefs who late</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were deemed their mightiest are within the ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wounded or stricken down. There Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gallant son of Tydeus, lies, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, the great spearman, wounded both;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Agamemnon; and Eurypylus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven from the field, an arrow in his thigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round them the healers, skilled in remedies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attend and dress their painful wounds, while thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, sittest here implacable.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, never be such fierce resentments mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou dost cherish, who art only brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For mischief! Whom wilt thou hereafter aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If now thou rescue not the perishing Greeks?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O merciless! it cannot surely be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Peleus was thy father, or the queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thetis thy mother; the green sea instead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rugged precipices brought thee forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For savage is thy heart. But if thou heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warning of some god, if thou hast heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aught which thy goddess-mother has received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Jove, send me at least into the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let me lead thy Myrmidons, that thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks may have some gleam of hope. And give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The armor from thy shoulders. I will wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mail, and then the Trojans, at the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May think I am Achilles, and may pause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From fighting, and the warlike sons of Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tired as they are, may breathe once more, and gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A respite from the conflict. Our fresh troops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May easily drive back upon their town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weary Trojans from our tents and fleet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, sighing; rash and blind, he asked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death for himself and evil destiny.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles the swift-footed also drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heavy sigh, and thus in turn he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What, O divine Patroclus, hast thou said?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fear no omen yet revealed to me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor has my goddess-mother told me aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Jove; but ever in my heart and soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rankles the painful sense of injury done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By one who, having greater power, deprives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An equal of his right, and takes away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prize he won. This is my wrong, and this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cause of all my bitterness of heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her whom the sons of Greece bestowed on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As my reward, a trophy of my spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the sack of a fenced city⁠—her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Agamemnon, son of Atreus, take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of my hands, as if I were a wretch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A worthless outcast. But let that affront</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be with the things that were. It is not well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear a grudge forever. I have said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My anger should not cease to burn until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clamor of the battle and the assault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should reach the fleet. But go thou and put on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My well-known armor; lead into the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Myrmidons, men that rejoice in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since like a lowering cloud the men of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surround the fleet, and the Achaians stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In narrow space close pressed beside the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the city of Ilium flings itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against them, confident of victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now that the glitter of my helm no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashes upon their eyes. Yet very soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their flying host would fill the trenches here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With corpses, had but Agamemnon dealt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gently with me; and now their squadrons close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around our army. Now no more the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is wielded by Tydides Diomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In rescue of the Greeks; no more the shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Agamemnon’s hated throat is heard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the man-queller Hector, lifting up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His voice, exhorts the Trojans, who, in throngs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raising the war-cry, fill the plain, and drive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks before them. Gallantly lead on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charge, Patroclus; rescue our good ships;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let not the enemy give them to the flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cut us off from our desired return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow my counsel; bear my words in mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shalt thou win for me among the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great honor and renown, and they shall bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beautiful maiden back with princely gifts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou hast driven the assailants from the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return thou hither. If the Thunderer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Husband of Juno, suffer thee to gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That victory, seek no further to prolong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The combat with the warlike sons of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart from me, lest I be brought to shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor, glorying in the battle and pursuit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slaying the Trojans as thou goest, lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy men to Troy, lest from the Olympian mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the ever-living gods descend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against thee: Phoebus loves the Trojans well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But come as soon as thou shalt see the ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In safety; leave the foes upon the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contending with each other. Would to Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The All-Father, and to Pallas, and the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bears the bow, Apollo, that of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans, many as they are, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks, not one might be reprieved from death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thou and I alone were left alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To overthrow the sacred walls of Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So talked they with each other. Ajax, whelmed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath a storm of darts, meantime but ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endured the struggle, for the will of Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fierce foe prevailed. His shining helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rang fearfully, as on his temples fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stroke following after stroke, the weapons hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against its polished studs. The buckler borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firmly on his left arm, and shifted oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From side to side, had wearied it, and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans, pressing round him, could not drive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all their darts, the hero from his place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavily heaved his panting chest; his limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streamed with warm sweat; there was no breathing time;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On danger danger followed, toil on toil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now, Muses, dwellers of Olympus, tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How first the galleys of the Greeks were fired.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hector drew near, and smote with his huge sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ashen spear of Ajax just below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The socket of the blade, and cut the stem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In two. The son of Telamon in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brandished the severed weapon, while afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brazen blade flew off, and ringing fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To earth. Then Ajax in his mighty mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Acknowledged that the gods were in the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shuddered, knowing that the Thunderer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was thwarting all his warlike purposes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And willed the victory to Troy. The chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withdrew beyond the reach of spears, while fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eager enemy hurled the blazing brands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the swift ship, and wrapped the stern in flames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unquenchable. Achilles saw, and smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His thigh, and spake: “Patroclus, noble friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knight, make haste: already I behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flames that rage with fury at the fleet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, lest the enemy seize our ships and we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be barred of our return, put quickly on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy armor; be my task to call the troops.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: Patroclus then in glittering brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrayed himself; and first around his thighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He put the beautiful greaves, and fastened them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With silver clasps; around his chest he bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The breastplate of the swift Aeacides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With star-like points, and richly chased; he hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sword with silver studs and blade of brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his shoulders, and with it the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Solid and vast; upon his gallant head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He placed the glorious helm with horse-hair plume,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That grandly waved on high. Two massive spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took, that fitted well his grasp, but left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear which great Achilles only bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy and huge and strong, and which no arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Greeks save his could poise; his strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone sufficed to wield it. ’Twas an ash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Chiron felled in Pelion’s top, and gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Peleus, that it yet might be the death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heroes. Then he called, to yoke with speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The steeds, Automedon, whom he esteemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next to Achilles, that great scatterer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of armies; for he found him ever firm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle, breasting faithfully its shock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Automedon led forth to take the yoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Xanthus and Balius, coursers that in speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were like the wind. Podargè brought them forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Zephyrus, while she, the Harpy, grazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By ocean’s streams. Upon the outer side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He joined to them the noble Pedasus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought by Achilles from the captured town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where ruled Eëtion. Though of mortal stock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well might he match with those immortal steeds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile Achilles armed the Myrmidons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passing from tent to tent. Like ravening wolves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Terribly strong, that, having slain among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hills an antlered stag of mighty size,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tear and devour it, while their jaws are stained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its red blood, then gather in a herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About some darkly flowing stream, and lap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sullen water with their slender tongues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drop the clots of blood from their grim mouths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, although gorged, are fierce and fearless still⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So came the leaders of the Myrmidons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In rushing crowds, about the valiant friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of swift Aeacides. Among them stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, great in war, encouraging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charioteers and warriors armed with shields.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Achilles, dear to Jupiter, had led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fifty swift barques to Ilium, and in each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were fifty men, companions at the oar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er these he gave command to five; himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Supreme in power, was ruler over all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One band the nobly armed Menestheus led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Spercheius. To that river-god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful Polydora brought him forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughter of Peleus; she, a mortal maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met an immortal’s love. Yet Borus, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Periëres, owned the boy and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mother for his bride, with princely dower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eudorus led the second band, a youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of warlike mould, whom Polymela bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughter of Phylas, graceful in the dance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In secrecy she brought him forth, for once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty Argus-queller saw the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the choir of those who danced and sang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Dian’s festival, the huntress-queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bears the golden shafts; he saw and loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, climbing to her chamber, met by stealth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The damsel, and she bore a gallant son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eudorus, swift of foot and brave in war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Ilithyia, midwife goddess, gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boy to see the pleasant light of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stout Echecleus, son of Actor, brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mother to his house, with liberal dower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged Phylas reared the child she left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tenderly as a son, and loved him well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pisander, warlike son of Msemalus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commanded the third squadron; none like him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Myrmidons could wield the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except Pelides. Phoenix, aged knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led the fourth squadron. With the fifth and last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There came Alcimedon, Laerceus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As leader. When their ranks were duly formed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles spake to them in earnest words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now, Myrmidons, forget no single word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the threats ye uttered against Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since first my wrath began. Ye blame me much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And say: ‘Hard-hearted son of Peleus, sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mother must have suckled thee on gall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sternly thou dost keep us in the ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwilling as we are. We might, at least,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crossing the sea, return in our good ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thus thine anger is to last.’ These words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye utter oft when our assemblies meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the great occasion is at hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which ye have longed for; now let him whose heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is fearless meet the Trojans valiantly.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and roused their courage and their might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as they heard their king they brought their rank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To closer order. As an architect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Builds up, with closely fitting stones, the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some tall mansion, proof against the blast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So close were now the helms and bossy shields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shield leaned on shield, and helm on helm, and man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On man, and on the glittering helmet-cones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horse-hair plumes with every motion touched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other, so compact the squadrons stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two heroes, nobly armed, were at their head, to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus and Automedon, and both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had but one thought⁠—to combat in the van.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Entering his tent, Achilles raised the lid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a fair coffer, beautifully wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which silver-footed Thetis placed on board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His barque, and filled with tunics, cloaks well lined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fleecy carpets. There he also kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A goblet richly chased, from which no lip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of man, save his, might drink the dark red wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor wine be poured to any god save Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty Father. This he took, in hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And purified with sulphur first, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rinsed with clear water. Next, with washen hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew the dark red wine, and stood without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the open space, and, pouring out the wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prayed with his eyes turned heavenward, not unheard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Jupiter, who wields the thunderbolt.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dodonian Jove, Pelasgian, sovereign King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose dwelling is afar, and who dost rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dodona winter-bound, where dwell thy priests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Selli, with unwashen feet, who sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the ground! Thou once hast heard my prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou hast honored me, and terribly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avenged me on the Greeks. Accomplish yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This one request of mine. I shall remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the rows of ships, but in my stead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I send my comrade, who will lead to war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My vast array of Myrmidons. With him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O God of Thunders, send the victory.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make his heart bold; let even Hector learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether my follower, though alone, can wage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Successful war, or conquer only then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I go forth with him into the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of slaughter. When he shall have beaten back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assailants from the fleet, let him return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unharmed to my good galleys and to me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all his arms and all his valiant men.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, offering prayer, and Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Great Disposer, hearkened. Half the prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The All-Father granted him, and half denied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive the storm of battle from the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He granted, but denied his friend’s return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In safety. When the warrior thus had prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And poured the wine to Father Jove, he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his tent again, and there replaced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goblet in the coffer. Coming forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood before the entrance to behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The terrible encounter of the hosts.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The newly armed, led by their gallant chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus, marched in warlike order forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in high hope, to fall upon the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As wasps, that by the wayside build their cells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Angered from time to time by thoughtless boys⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence mischief comes to many⁠—if by chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some passing traveller should unwittingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disturb them, all at once are on the wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all attack him, to defend their young</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fearless and so fierce the Myrmidons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured from their fleet, and mighty was the din.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus with loud voice exhorted them:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Myrmidons, companions of the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus, bear in mind, my friends, your fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For valor, and be men, that we who serve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, we who combat hand to hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May honor him by our exploits, and teach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide-ruling Agamemnon how he erred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slighting the bravest warrior of the Greeks.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These words awoke the courage and the might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all who heard them, and in close array</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fell upon the Trojans. Fearfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fleet around them echoed to the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Argives shouting. When the Trojans saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In glittering arms, Menoetius’ gallant son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his attendant, every heart grew faint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fear; the close ranks wavered; for they thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the swift son of Peleus at the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had laid aside his wrath, and was again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The friend of Agamemnon. Eagerly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They looked around for an escape from death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then first Patroclus cast his shining displeasure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the crowd before him, where they fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most fiercely round the stern of the good ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brave Protesilaüs. There it smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pyraechmes, who had led from Amydon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the broad Axius, his Paeonian knights.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through his right shoulder went the blade; he fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavily groaning, to the earth. His band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of warriors from Paeonia, panic-struck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fled from Patroclus as they saw their chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut off, their bravest in the battle-field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So from the ship he drave the foe, and quenched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blazing fire. There lay the half-burnt barque,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While with a mighty uproar fled the host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy, and from between the beaked ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured after them with tumult infinite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks. As when from some high mountain-top</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The God of Lightnings, Jupiter, sweeps off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The overshadowing cloud, at once appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The watch-lowers and the headland heights and lawns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All in full light, and all the unmeasured depth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ether opens, so the Greeks, when thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fleet was rescued from the hostile flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathed for a space; and yet they might not cease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From battle, for not everywhere alike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were chased the Trojans from the dark-hulled ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the Greeks, but struggled still to keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mastery, and yielded but to force.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then in that scattered conflict of the chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each Argive slew a warrior. With his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave son of Menoetius made a thrust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Areilochus, and pierced his thigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as he turned away, and through the part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forced the keen weapon, splintering as it went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bone, and brought the Trojan to the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And warlike Menelaus pierced the breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thoas where the buckler left it bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took his life. The son of Phyleus saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amphiclus rushing on, and with his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met him and pierced his leg below the knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where brawniest is the limb. The blade cut through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sinews, and his eyes were closed in night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There fought the sons of Nestor. One of these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antilochus, transfixed with his good spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atymnius through the flank, and brought him down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At his own feet. With sorrow Maris saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother fall, and toward Antilochus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew to defend the corpse; but ere he strook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The godlike Thrasymedes, with a blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That missed not, smote his shoulder, tearing off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the spear’s blade upon the upper arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The muscles from the bone. With ringing arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell, and darkness gathered o’er his eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus were two brothers by two brothers slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sent to Erebus; two valiant friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were they of King Sarpedon, and the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Amisodarus, who reared and fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chimera, the destroyer of mankind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oilean Ajax, springing forward, seized</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Cleobulus, for the struggling crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hindered his flight. He took the Trojan’s life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiting the neck with his huge-handled sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blade grew warm with blood, and cruel fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought darkness o’er the dying warrior’s eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peneleus fought with Lycon; each had cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spear and missed his aim, and now with swords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The twain encountered. Lycon dealt a stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the crested helmet of his foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blade failed him, breaking at the hilt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime Peneleus smote beneath the ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The neck of Lycon: deep the weapon went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The severed head, held only by the skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dropped to one side, and life forsook the limbs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meriones, o’ertaking Acamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In rapid flight, discharged a mighty blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his left shoulder as he climbed his car;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell, and darkness gathered o’er his eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then plunged Idomeneus the cruel spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the mouth of Erymas. The blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed on beneath the brain, and pierced the neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there divided the white bones. It dashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The teeth out; both the eyes were filled with blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which gushed from mouth and nostrils as he breathed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the black cloud of death came over him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus every Grecian leader slew his man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As ravening wolves that spring on lambs and kids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seize them, wandering wide among the hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the keeper’s care, and bear them off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rend with cruel fangs their helpless prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fiercely did the Achaians fling themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the men of Troy, who only thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of flight from that tumultuous strife, and quite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgot their wonted valor. All the while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greater Ajax sought to hurl his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Hector, clad in brazen mail, who yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expert in battle, kept his ample chest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hid by his bull’s-hide shield, and, though he heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hiss of darts and clash of spears, and saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fortune of the field deserting him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lingered to rescue his beloved friends.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As from the summit of Olympus spreads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloud into the sky that late was clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Jove brings on the tempest, with such speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In clamorous flight the Trojans left the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet passed they not the trench in seemly plight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rapid steeds of Hector bore him safe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across with all his arms, while, left between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The high banks of the trench, the Trojan host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struggled despairingly. The fiery steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harnessed to many a chariot, left it there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With broken pole. Patroclus followed close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mighty voice encouraging the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And meditating vengeance on the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That noisily ran on, and right and left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were scattered, filling all the ways. The dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose thick and high, and spread, and reached the clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As with swift feet the Trojan coursers held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their way to Ilium from the tents and ships.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus where he saw the wildest rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drave thither, shouting threats. Full many a chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell under his own axle from his car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chariots with a crash were overthrown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift, immortal horses which the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestowed on Peleus leaped the trench at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eager to reach the plain. As eagerly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus longed to overtake and smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector, whose steeds were hurrying him away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As when, in autumn time, the dark-brown earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is whelmed with water from the stormy clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Jupiter pours down his heaviest rains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Offended at men’s crimes who override</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The laws by violence, and drive justice forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the tribunals, heedless of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their displeasure⁠—all the running streams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are swelled to floods⁠—the furious torrents tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mountain slopes, and, plunging from the heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mighty roar, lay waste the works of mtn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fling themselves into the dark-blue sea⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus with loud tumult fled the Trojan horse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Patroclus, having cut the nearest bands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy in pieces, made his warriors turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the fleet, and, eager as they were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stopped the pursuit that led them toward the town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, in the area bounded by the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>River, and lofty wall, he chased and smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took full vengeance. With his glittering spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wounded Pronoüs where the buckler left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The breast exposed; the Trojan with a clash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell to the earth, and life forsook his limbs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advancing in his might, Patroclus smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thestor, the son of Enops, as he sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cowering upon his sumptuous seat, o’ercome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fear, and dropped the reins. Through his right cheek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the teeth Patroclus thrust his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er the chariot’s border drew him forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the spear’s stem. As when an angler sits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a jutting rock, and from the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draws a huge fish with line and gleaming hook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So did Patroclus, with his shining spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw forth the panting Trojan from his car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shook him clear: he fell to earth and died.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As Eryalus then came swiftly on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus flung a stone, and on the brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote him; the Trojan’s head, beneath the blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parted in two within the helm; he fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Headlong to earth, a prey to ghastly death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then slew he Erymas, Amphoterus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Epaltes, Pyris, Ipheus, Echius,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tlepolemus, Damastor’s son, and next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Euippus; nor was Polymelus spared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Argias⁠—smitten all, and thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain upon slain, along their mother earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now Sarpedon, as he saw his friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unbelted Lycians, falling by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Menoetiades, exhorted thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gallant Lycians: “Shame upon you all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Lycians! whither do you flee? Be bold!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I myself will meet this man, and learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who walks the field in triumph thus, and makes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such havoc in our squadrons; for his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has laid full miny a gallant warrior low.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and from his car with all his arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang to the ground, while on the other side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus, as he saw him come, leaped down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left his chariot. As on some tall rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two vultures, with curved talons and hooked beaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fight screaming, so these two with furious cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advanced against each other. When the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of crafty Saturn saw them meet, his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was touched with pity, and he thus bespake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spouse and sister Juno: “Woe is me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sarpedon, most beloved of men, is doomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To die, o’ercome by Menoetiades.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I halt between two purposes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether to bear him from this fatal fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alive and safe, to Lycia’s fertile fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or let him perish by his enemy’s hand.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Imperial, large-eyed Juno answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What words, dread son of Saturn, hast thou said!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst thou deliver from the common lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of death a mortal doomed long since by fate?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do as thou wilt, but be thou sure of this⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other gods will not approve. And bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mind these words of mine. If thou shouldst send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sarpedon home to Lycia safe, reflect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some other god may claim the right, like thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rescue his beloved son from death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle; for we know that in the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round Priam’s noble city are many sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gods, who will with vehement anger see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy interposing hand. Yet if he be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So dear to thee, and thou dost pity him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him in mortal combat be o’ercome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Menoetiades, and when the breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of life has left his frame, give thou command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Death and gentle Sleep to bear him hence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the broad realm of Lycia. There his friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brethren shall perform the funeral rites;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There shall they build him up a tomb, and rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A column⁠—honors that become the dead.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She ceased, nor did the All-Father disregard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her words. He caused a bloody dew to fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the earth in sorrow for the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom well he loved, and whom Patroclus soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should slay upon the fertile plain of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the pleasant land that saw his birth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The warriors now drew near. Patroclus slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble Thrasymelus, who had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sarpedon’s valiant comrade in the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below the belt he smote him, and he fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifeless. Sarpedon threw his shining lance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It missed, but struck the courser Pedasus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the right shoulder. With a groan he fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dust, and, moaning, breathed his life away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the two living horses sprang apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the yoke creaked, and the entangled reins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were useless, fastened to the fallen horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Automedon, the mighty spearman, saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The remedy, and from his brawny thigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew his sword, and cut the outside horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loose from his fellows. They again were brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together, and obeyed the reins once more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the two chiefs renewed the mortal fight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now, again, Sarpedon’s shining spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was vainly flung; the point, in passing o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus’s left shoulder, gave no wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turn, Patroclus, hurling not in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His weapon, smote him where the midriff’s web</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holds the tough heart. He fell as falls an oak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or poplar or tall pine, which workmen hew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the mountains with their sharpened steel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To frame a ship. So he before his steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chariot fell upon the bloody dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grasped it with his hands, and gnashed his teeth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a lion coming on a herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seizes, amid the crowd of stamping beeves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tawny and high-mettled bull, that dies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bellowing in fury in the lion’s jaws⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like him, indignant to be overcome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leader of the bucklered Lycian host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid prostrate by Patroclus, called by name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dear companion, and addressed him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Beloved Glaucus, mighty among men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now prove thyself a hero, now be bold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, if thou have a warrior’s spirit, think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of nought but battle. Go from rank to rank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exhorting all the Lycian chiefs to fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around Sarpedon. Combat thou for me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy good spear, for I shall be to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shame and a reproach through all thy days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If here the Greeks, beside whose ships I fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear off my armor. Stand thou firm, and stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy people up to combat valiantly.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While he was speaking, death crept o’er his sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stopped his breath. Patroclus set his heel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against his bosom, and plucked out the spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The midriff followed it, and thus he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life and weapon forth at once. Meantime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Myrmidons held fast the snorting steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, loosened from the Lycian’s car, were bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On flight. The grief of Glaucus as he heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrade’s voice was bitter, and his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ached at the thought that he could bring no aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seized his arm and pressed it in his grasp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there the wound which Teucer’s arrow left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Glaucus stormed the wall and Teucer’s shafts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defended it, still pained him grievously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus he prayed to Phoebus, archer-god:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Give ear, O king! wherever thou abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the opulent realm of Lycia, or in Troy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For everywhere thou nearest those who cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee in sorrow, and great sorrow now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is on me. Grievous is the wound I bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharp are the pains that pierce my hand; the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot be stanched; my very arm becomes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A burden; I can wield the spear no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a firm grasp, nor combat with the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty chief⁠—Sarpedon, son of Jove⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has perished, and the father came not nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid his son. Yet come thou to my aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O monarch-god! and heal this painful wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give me strength to rally to the fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lycian warriors, and myself contend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Valiantly for the rescue of the dead.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So prayed he: Phoebus hearkened, and at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assuaged the pain, and stanched the purple blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the deep wound, and filled his frame with strength.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warrior felt the change, rejoiced to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with such friendly speed the mighty god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Granted his prayer. And first he went among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lycian chiefs, exhorting them to wage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce battle for Sarpedon. Then he sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walking with rapid strides, the Trojan chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agenor, nobly born, Polydamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Panthoüs, tineas next,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hector mailed in brass. By him he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus accosted him with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Hector, thou art careless of the fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thine allies, who for thy sake, afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From those they love, and from their native land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pour out their lives; thou bringest them no aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sarpedon lies in death, the chief who led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bucklered Lycians, who with justice swayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The realm of Lycia, and defended it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With valor. Him hath brazen Mars beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon of Patroclus smitten down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come then, my friends, repulse we gallantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These Myrmidons; else will they bear away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His armor and insult his corpse, to avenge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The havoc we have made among the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who perished by our weapons at the fleet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and grief immitigable seized</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans; for the slain, though stranger-bom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been a pillar of the realm of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many were the troops that followed him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he was bravest of them all in war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then rushed the Trojans fiercely on the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Hector, sorrowing for Sarpedon’s fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading them on, while the bold-hearted chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus Menoetiades, aroused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The courage of the Greeks. He thus addressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warriors Ajax, eager like himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For combat: “Be it now your welcome task,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O warriors Ajax, to drive back the foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who first sprang across the Grecian wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sarpedon, lies a corpse, and we must now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dishonor the dead chief, and strip from him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His armor, and strike down with our good spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoever of his comrades shall resist.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and all were resolute to beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The enemy back; and when, on either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trojans and Lycians, Myrmidons and Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had put their phalanxes in firm array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They closed, with dreadful shouts and horrid clash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of arms, in fight around the dead, while Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew o’er that deadly fray an awful veil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of darkness, that the struggle for the corpse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his dear son might rage more furiously.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans first drave back the dark-eyed Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one was in the onset smitten down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the least valiant of the Myrmidons⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of brave Agacles, nobly born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Epeigeus, who aforetime, when he ruled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The populous Budeium, having slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A noble kinsman, fled a suppliant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Peleus and the silver-footed queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thetis, his consort, and by them was sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With terrible Achilles, to the coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of courser-breeding Ilium and the siege</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy. As now he stooped to seize the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious Hector smote him with a stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the forehead, cleaving it in two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the strong helmet; headlong on the corse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell, and cruel death crept over him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With grief Patroclus saw his comrade slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And broke his way among the foremost ranks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a swift hawk that chases through the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Starlings and daws, so didst thou dart among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trojans and Lycians, for thy wrath was roused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O knight Patroclus! by thy comrade’s death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now his hand struck Sthenelaüs down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dear son of Ithaemenes; he flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stone that crushed the sinews of the neck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back drew illustrious Hector, and with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warriors who were fighting in the van.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As far as one can send a javelin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When men contend in martial games, or meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their deadly enemies in war, so far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withdrew the Trojans, and the Greeks pursued.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leader of the bucklered Lycian host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glaucus, was first to turn against his foes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slew the brave Bathycles, the dear son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Chalcon, who in Hellas had his home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And was the richest of the Myrmidons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lycian, turning on him suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he drew near pursuing, sent his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right through his breast, and with a clash he fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great was the sorrow of the Greeks to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That valiant warrior fall; the men of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exulted, and pressed round him in a crowd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor lacking was the valor of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who met them manfully. Meriones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck down a Trojan chief, Laogonus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onetor’s valiant son. His father stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Priest at the altar of Idaean Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a god was honored by the realm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below the jaw and ear Meriones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote him, and instantly the life forsook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His limbs, and fearful darkness shrouded him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight at Meriones Aeneas aimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brazen spear to smite him, as he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath his buckler; but the Greek beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon in the air, and, stooping low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escaped it; over him it passed, and stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixed in the earth behind him, where its stem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trembled, for now the rapid steel had spent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its force. As thus it quivered in the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas, who perceived that it had left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His powerful hand in vain, was vexed, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Had I but struck thee, dancer as thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meriones, my spear had suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ended thy dancing.” Then Meriones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The skilful spearman, answered: “Thou art brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou wilt find it hard to overcome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The might of all who gather to repulse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy onset. Thou art mortal, and if I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aiming at thee with my good spear, should pierce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy bosom, valiant as thou art and proud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy strong arm, thy death would bring me praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And send thy soul where gloomy Pluto dwells.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the brave Patroclus heard, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rebuked him: “Why wilt thou, Meriones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all thy valor, stand to make a speech?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foe, my friend, will not be forced to leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corpse by insults; some of them must die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In deeds the issue of a battle lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Words are for counsel. Now is not the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To utter swelling phrases, but to fight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ended, and went on; the godlike man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed his steps. As when from mountain dells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rises, and far is heard, a crashing sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where woodmen fell the trees, such was the noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From those who fought on that wide plain⁠—the din</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brass, of leather, and of tough bull’s-hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smitten with swords and two-edged spears. No eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although of keenest sight, would then have known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noble Sarpedon, covered as he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From head to foot, with weapons, blood, and dust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still the warriors thronged around the dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when in spring-time at the cattle-stalls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flies gather, humming, when the milk is drawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round the full pails, so swarmed around the corpse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The combatants; nor once did Jove withdraw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bright eyes from the stubborn fray, but still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazed, planning how Patroclus should be slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncertain whether, in the desperate strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the great Sarpedon, to permit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious Hector with his spear to lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero dead, and make his arms a spoil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or spare him yet a while, to make the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More bloody. As he pondered, this seemed best:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the brave comrade of Achilles first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should put to flight the Trojans and their chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector the brazen-mailed, pursuing them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward Troy with slaughter. To this end he sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the heart of Hector panic fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who climbed his car and fled, and bade the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flee also, for he saw how Jove had weighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fortunes of the day. Now none remained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even the gallant Lycians, when they saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their monarch lying wounded to the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among a heap of slain; for Saturn’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that day’s strife had caused a multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fall in death. Now when the Greeks had stripped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sarpedon of the glittering brazen mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave son of Menoetius bade his friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Convey it to the hollow ships. Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cloud-compeller spake to Phoebus thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Go now, beloved Phoebus, and withdraw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sarpedon from the weapons of the foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleanse him from the dark blood, and bear him thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lave him in the river-stream, and shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambrosia o’er him. Clothe him then in robes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heaven, consigning him to Sleep and Death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twin brothers, and swift bearers of the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they shall lay him down in Lycia’s fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That broad and opulent realm. There shall his friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kinsmen give him burial, and shall rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tomb and column⁠—honors due the dead.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: Apollo instantly obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father, leaving Ida’s mountain height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sought the field of battle, and bore off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noble Sarpedon from the enemy’s spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laved him in the river-stream, and shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambrosia o’er him. Then in robes of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He clothed him, giving him to Sleep and Death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twin brothers, and swift bearers of the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they, with speed conveying it, laid down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corpse in Lycia’s broad and opulent realm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime Patroclus, urging on his steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And charioteer, pursued, to his own hurt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trojans and Lycians. Madman! had he then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obeyed the counsel which Pelides gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bitter doom of death had not been his.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But stronger than the purposes of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are those of Jove, who puts to flight the brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And takes from them the victory, though he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impelled them to the battle; and he now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Urged on Patroclus to prolong the fight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who first, when thus the gods decreed thy death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell by thy hand, Patroclus, and who last?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adrastus first, Autonoüs next, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echeclus; then died Perimus, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Meges; then with Melanippus fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Epistor; next was Elasus o’ercome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Mulius, and Pylartes. These he slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While all the rest betook themselves to flight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then had the Greeks possessed themselves of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all its lofty portals, by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And valor of Patroclus, for his rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was terrible beyond the rage of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bore the spear, had not Apollo stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a strong tower to menace him with ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aid the Trojans. Thrice Patroclus climbed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shoulder of the lofty wall, and thrice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo, striking his immortal hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the glittering buckler, thrust him down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when, for the fourth time, the godlike man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Essayed to mount the wall, the archer-god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus, encountered him with fearful threats:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Noble Patroclus, hold thy hand, nor deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city of the warlike Trojans doomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fall beneath thy spear, nor by the arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus’ son, though mightier far than thou.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; Patroclus, fearful of the wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the archer-god, withdrew, and stood afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Hector, at the Scaean gates, restrained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His coursers, doubtful whether to renew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fight by mingling with the crowd again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or gather all his host within the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a loud summons. As he pondered thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo stood beside him in the form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Asius, a young warrior and a brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncle of Hector, the great horse-tamer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brother of Queen Hecuba, and son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Dymas, who in Phrygia dwelt beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The streams of the Sangarius. Putting on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shape and aspect, thus Apollo said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why, Hector, dost thou pause from battle thus?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, it becomes thee not. Were I in might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greater than thou, as I am less, full soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst thou repent this shrinking from the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come boldly on, and urge thy firm-paced steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against Patroclus; slay him on the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Phoebus will requite thee with renown.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and mingled in the hard-fought fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While noble Hector bade his charioteer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave Cebriones, ply well the lash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And join the battle. Phoebus went before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entering the crowd, and spread dismay among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks, and gave the glory of the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hector and the Trojans. Little heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paid Hector to the rest, nor raised his arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay them, but urged on his firm-paced steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet Patroclus, who, beholding him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaped from his car. In his left hand he held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spear, and with the other lifting up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white, rough stone, the largest he could grasp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flung it with all its force. It flew not wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor flew in vain, but smote Cebriones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warlike chief who guided Hector’s steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spurious son of Priam the renowned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sharp stone smote his forehead as he held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The reins, and crushed both eyebrows in; the bone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resisted not the blow; the warrior’s eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell in the dust before his very feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down from the sumptuous seat he plunged, as dives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A swimmer, and the life forsook his limbs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this, Patroclus, was thy cruel jest:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Truly a nimble man is this who dives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such expertness. Were this, now, the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where fish are bred, and he were searching it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For oysters, he might get an ample store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many men, in leaping from a ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though in a storm, so skilfully he dives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even from the chariot to the plain. No doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There must be divers in the town of Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and sprang upon Cebriones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all a lion’s fury, which attacks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stables and is wounded in the breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And perishes through his own daring; thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus, didst thou fall upon the slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Hector, hastening also, left his steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both contended for Cebriones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As lions for the carcass of a deer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fight on a mountain summit, hungry both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both unyielding, thus two mighty men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of war, Patroclus Menuetiades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glorious Hector, eager each to smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His adversary with the cruel spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fought for Cebriones. The slain man’s head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was seized by Hector’s powerful hand, whose grasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Relaxed not, while Patroclus held the foot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, thronging to the spot, the other Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Trojans mingled in the desperate strife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As when the east wind and the south contend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the open mountain grounds, and furiously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assail the deep old woods of beech and ash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And barky cornel, flinging their long boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against each other with a mighty roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crash of those that break, so did the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Trojans meet with mutual blows, and slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other; nor had either host a thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shameful flight. Full many a trenchant spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to its mark beside Cebriones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a wingèd arrow that had left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bowstring; many a massive stone was hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the ringing bucklers, as they fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the dead, while he, the mighty, lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretched on the ground amid the eddying dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgetful of his art of horsemanship.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While yet the sun was climbing to his place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In middle heaven, the men of either host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were smitten by the weapons, and in both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people fell; but when he stooped to the west</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks prevailed, and from that storm of darts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tumult of the Trojans they drew forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cebriones, and stripped him of his arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still rushed Patroclus onward, bent to wreak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fury on the Trojans. Fierce as Mars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He charged their squadrons thrice with fearful shouts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrice he laid nine warriors in the dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as with godlike energy he made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fourth assault, then clearly was it seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus, that thy life was near its end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Phoebus terribly in that fierce strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encountered thee. Patroclus saw him not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advancing in the tumult, for he moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unseen in darkness. Coming close behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He smote, with open palm, the hero’s back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the ample shoulders, and his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reeled with the blow, while Phoebus from his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck the tall helm, that, clanking, rolled away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the horses’ feet; its crest was soiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blood and dust, though never till that hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had dust defiled its horse-hair plume; for once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That helmet guarded an illustrious head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious brows of Peleus’ son, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove destined it for Hector, to be worn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle; and his death was also near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear Patroclus wielded, edged with brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long, tough, and huge, was broken in his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his broad buckler, dropping with its band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay on the ground, while Phoebus, son of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Undid the fastenings of his mail. With mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bewildered, and with powerless limbs, he stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thunderstruck. Then a Dardanian named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Euphorbus, son of Panthoüs, who excelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrades in the wielding of the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The race, and horsemanship, approaching, smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus in the back with his keen spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the shoulder-blades. Already he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had dashed down twenty warriors from their cars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guiding his own, a learner in the art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of war. The first was he who threw a lance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thee, Patroclus, yet o’ercome thee not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, plucking from thy back its ashen stem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fled, and mingled with the crowd, nor dared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Await thy coming, though thou wert unarmed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, weakened by that wound and by the blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given by the god, Patroclus turned and sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shelter from danger in the Grecian ranks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Hector, when he saw the gallant Greek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus wounded and retreating, left his place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the squadrons, and, advancing, pierced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus with his spear, below the belt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driving the weapon deep. The hero fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With clashing mail, and all the Greeks beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fall with grief. As when a lion bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stubborn boar to earth, what time the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fight on the mountains for a slender spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both thirsty and both fierce, the lion’s strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lays prone his panting foe, so Priam’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slew, fighting hand to hand, the valiant Greek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Menoetius, who himself had slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many. Hector gloried over him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wingèd words: “Patroclus, thou didst think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lay our city waste, and carry off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our women captive in thy ships to Greece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Madman! in their defence the fiery steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector sweep the battle-field, and I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mightiest of all the Trojans, with the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will guard them from the doom of slavery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now vultures shall devour thee, wretched youth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, mighty though he be, has brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No help to thee, though doubtless when he sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee forth to battle, and remained within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He charged thee thus: ‘ Patroclus, flower of knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return not to the fleet until thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath torn the bloody armor from the corpse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the man-queller Hector.’ So he spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And filled with idle hopes thy foolish heart.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thou, Patroclus, with a faltering voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst answer thus: “Now, Hector, while thou mayst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Utter thy boast in swelling words, since Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Phoebus gave the victory to thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Easily have they vanquished me; ’twas they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stripped the armor from my limbs, for else,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If twenty such as thou had met me, all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had perished by my spear. A cruel fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ertakes me, aided by Latona’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The god, and by Euphorbus among men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou who shalt take my spoil art but the third;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet hear my words, and keep them in thy thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not long shalt thou remain alive; thy death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By violence is at hand, and thou must fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by the hand of great Aeacides.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While he was speaking, death stole over him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And veiled his senses, while the soul forsook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His limbs and flew to Hades, sorrowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For its sad lot, to part from life in youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prime of strength. Illustrious Hector thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered the dying man: “Why threaten me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus, with an early death? Who knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he, thy friend, whom fair-haired Thetis bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, may not sooner lose his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by my spear?” He spake, and set his heel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the slain, and from the wound drew forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brazen spear and pushed the corpse aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the weapon hurried on to smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Godlike Automedon, the charioteer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of swift Aeacides; but him the steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleet-footed and immortal, which the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestowed on Peleus, swiftly bore away.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
