<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book XIII: The Continuation of the Fourth Battle</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-13" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Continuation of the Fourth Battle</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Descent of Neptune in aid of the Greeks⁠—His exhortations addressed to the Chiefs⁠—The Trojans harangued by Hector, and the battle renewed with great fury⁠—Hector’s advance checked by the Ajaxes, who rally the Greeks⁠—Exploits of Meriones and Idomeneus⁠—Idomeneus forced to retire by Deïphobus and Aeneas⁠—The Trojans, hard pressed on their left, are rallied by Hector⁠—Reproof of Paris by Hector, and mutual defiance of Hector and Ajax.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>When Jove had brought the Trojans and their chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector, beside the ships, he left them there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To toil and struggle and endure, while he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned his resplendent eyes upon the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thracian horsemen, and the Mysians, skilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat hand to hand, and the famed tribe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of long-lived Hippomulgi, reared on milk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the most just of men. On Troy no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned those glorious eyes, for now he deemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That none of all the gods would seek to aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Either the Greeks or Trojans in the strife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The monarch Neptune kept no idle watch;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he in Thracian Samos, dark with woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloft upon the highest summit sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erlooking thence the tumult of the war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thence could he behold the Idaean mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Priam’s city, and the Grecian fleet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, coming from the ocean-deeps, he sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pitied the Greek warriors put to rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the Trojans, and was wroth with Jove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon he descended from those rugged steeps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trod the earth with rapid strides; the hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forests quaked beneath the immortal feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Neptune as he walked. Three strides he took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the fourth reached Aegae, where he stopped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where his sumptuous palace-halls were built,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep down in ocean, golden, glittering, proof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against decay of time. These when he reached,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He yoked his swift and brazen-footed steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With manes of flowing gold, to draw his car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put on golden mail, and took his scourge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought of fine gold, and climbed the chariot-seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rode upon the waves. The whales came forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their deep haunts, and frolicked round his way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They knew their king. The waves rejoicing smoothed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A path, and rapidly the coursers flew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor was the brazen axle wet below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus they brought him to the Grecian fleet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Deep in the sea there is a spacious cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the rugged Imbrus and the isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tenedos. There Neptune, he who shakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shores, held back his steeds, took off their yoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave them ambrosial food, and, binding next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their feet with golden fetters which no power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might break or loosen, so that they might wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lord’s return, he sought the Grecian host.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still did the Trojans, rushing on in crowds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like flames or like a tempest, follow close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector, the son of Priam; still their rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abated not; with stormy cries they came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They hoped to seize the fleet and slay the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside it. But the power who swathes the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shakes it, Neptune, coming from the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revived the valor of the Greeks. He took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shape of Calchas and his powerful voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus to either Ajax, who yet stemmed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle with a resolute heart, he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O chieftains! Yours it is to save the host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recalling your old valor, with no thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fatal flight. Elsewhere I feel no dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what the daring sons of Troy may do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who climb the wall in throngs; the well-greaved Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will meet them bravely. But where Hector leads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce as a flame, his squadrons, he who boasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be a son of sovereign Jove, I fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest we should sorely suffer. May the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strengthen your hearts to stand against the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flinch not, and exhort the rest to stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drive him back, audacious as he is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the swift ships, though Jove should urge him on.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus earth-surrounding Neptune said, and touched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each hero with his sceptre, filled their hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With valor, gave new lightness to their limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feet and hands, and then, as when a hawk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shoots swiftly from some lofty precipice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chases o’er the plain another bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So swiftly Neptune, shaker of the shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darted from them away. Oileus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perceived the immortal presence first, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once to Telamonian Ajax spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Some god, O Ajax, from the Olympian hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wearing the augur’s form, hath bid us fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the ships; nor can it be the seer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calchas, for well I marked his feet and legs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he departed; easily by these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods are known. I feel a spirit roused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my own bosom eager to engage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fierce strife; my very feet below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hands above, take part in the desire.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the son of Telamon replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“So also these strong hands that grasp the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burn eagerly to wield it, and my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is full of courage. I am hurried on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By both my feet, and vehemently long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To try alone the combat with this chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of boundless valor, Hector, Priam’s son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus they conferred, rejoicing as they felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ardor for the battle which the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had breathed into their hearts. Meantime he roused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians at the rear, who in their ships too</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought respite, and whose limbs were faint with toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their hearts sad to see the Trojan host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tumult pouring o’er the lofty wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they beheld, the tears came gushing forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From underneath their lids; they little hoped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For rescue from destruction; but when came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The power that shakes the shores, he woke anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spirit of their valiant phalanxes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teucer he first addressed, and Leitus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero Peneleus and Thoas next,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deipyrus, Meriones expert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle, and Antilochus his peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus exhorted them with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shame on you, Argive youths! I put my trust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In your tried valor to defend our fleet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if ye fear to face the perilous fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The day has risen which shall behold us fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vanquished before the Trojans. O ye gods!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These eyes have seen a marvel, a strange sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And terrible, which I had never thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could be⁠—the Trojans close upon our ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They who, erewhile, were like the timid deer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wander in the wood an easy prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To jackals, pards, and wolves⁠—weak things, unapt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For combat, fleeing, but without an aim.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such were the Trojans, who till now ne’er dared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withstand the might and prowess of the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even for an hour. But now, afar from Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They give us battle at the hollow ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All through our general’s fault, and through the sloth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Greek warriors, who, displeased with him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fight not for their swift galleys, but are slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside them. Yet although our sovereign chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides Agamemnon, may have done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foul wrong, dishonoring the swift-footed son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus, still ye cannot without blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decline the combat. Let us then repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mischief done; the hearts of valiant men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are soon appeased. And not without the loss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of honor can your fiery courage sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since ye are known the bravest of the host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would not chide the weak, unwarlike man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For shrinking from the combat; but for you⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I look on you with anger in my heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weaklings! Ye soon will bring upon yourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some sorer evil if ye loiter thus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let each of you bethink him of the shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And infamy impending. Terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The struggle is before us. Hector storms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ships, loud-shouting Hector; he has burst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gate and broken the protecting bar.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Neptune spake, encouraging the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While firmly stood the serried phalanxes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round either Ajax, nor could Mars himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Pallas, musterer of armèd hosts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reprove their order. There the flower of Greece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waited the Trojans and their noble chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spear beside spear, and shield by shield, so close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That buckler pressed on buckler, helm on helm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And man on man. The plumes of horse-hair touched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other as they nodded on the crests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the bright helms, so close the warriors stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lances quivered in the fearless hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of warriors eager to advance and strike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The enemy. But the men of Troy began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assault; the fiery Hector was the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rush against the Greeks. As when a stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolls from a cliff before a wintry flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sweeps it down the steep, when mighty rains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have worn away the props that held it fast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It rolls and bounds on high; the woods around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crash, as it tears its unresisted way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the slope until it reach the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, however urged, moves on no more;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Hector, menacing to cut his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through tents and galleys to the very sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slaying as he went forward, when he now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met the firm phalanxes and pressed them close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stopped suddenly; the sons of Greece withstood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His onset and repulsed it, striking him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With swords and two-edged spears, and made the chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give way before the shock. He lifted up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His voice and shouted to the Trojans thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Trojans and Lycians and Dardanians skilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fighting hand to hand, stand firm. Not long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will the Greeks bide my onset, though drawn up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Square as a tower in close array. My spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I trust, will scatter them, if true it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Juno’s husband, Sovereign of the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lord of thunders, prompts my arm today.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and kindled in the breasts of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh courage. In the band Deïphobus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marched proudly, Priam’s son, with his round shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him, walking with a quick, light step</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind its shelter. Then Meriones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aimed at the chief his glittering spear; the point</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Missed not; it struck the orb of bullock’s hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet did not pierce it, for the weapon broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just at the neck. Deïphobus held forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shield far from him, dreading to receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spear-thrust from the brave Meriones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vexed thus to lose the victory, and the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snapped by the blow, Meriones fell back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the column of his friends, and passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastily toward the camp and ships, to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A powerful spear that stood within his tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While others fought, and fearful was the din.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Teucer first, the son of Telamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote gallant Imbrius, son of Mentor, lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many steeds. He, ere the Greeks had come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Troy, dwelt at Pedaeum and espoused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Medesicasta, Priam’s spurious child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the well-oared galleys of the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mustered at Troy, he also came, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was eminent among her chiefs, and dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Priam, and was honored as his son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Telamon beneath the ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierced him with his long javelin, and drew forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon. Headlong to the earth he fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on a mountain height, descried from far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hewn by a brazen axe, an ash is felled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lays its tender sprays upon the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Imbrius fell, and round him in his fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clashed his bright armor. Teucer sprang in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spoil the dead, but Hector hurled at him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shining spear; the wary Teucer stepped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aside, and just escaped the brazen blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It struck Amphiniachus, Cteatus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Actor’s grandson; as he came to join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle, he was smitten in the breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fell, his armor clashing round his limbs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Hector flew in haste to tear away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the large-souled Amphimachus the helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That cased his temples. Ajax saw, and hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His glittering spear at Hector as he came:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It made no wound; for Hector stood equipped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All o’er in formidable brass. The spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck on the bossy shield with such a shock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As forced him to recoil, and leave unspoiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bodies, which the Achaians dragged away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Stichius and Menestheus, chief among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Athenians, bore the dead Amphimachus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Greek camp, while the two men of might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chieftains Ajax, lifted Imbrius up;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as two lions, bearing off among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The close-grown shrubs a goat, which they have snatched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From sharp-toothed dogs, uplift it in their jaws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the ground, so the two warriors raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corpse of Imbrius, and stripped off the mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, angered that Amphilochus was slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oileus’ son struck from the tender neck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The head, and sent it far among the crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whirled like a ball, to fall at Hector’s feet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime was Neptune moved with grief to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His grandson perish in that desperate fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And passed among the Achaian tents and ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encouraging the men, and planning woes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Ilium. There he met Idomeneus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expert to wield the spear, as he returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From caring for a comrade who had left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle, wounded in the knee, and whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friends had carried in. Idomeneus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had called the surgeons to his aid, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was hastening to the field, intent to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His part in battle. Him the monarch god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ocean thus addressed, but first he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voice of Thoas, King Andraemon’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose father ruled the Aetolians through the bounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pleuron, and in lofty Calydon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a god was honored in the land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O counsellor of Crete, Idomeneus!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where are the threats which late the sons of Greece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uttered against the Trojans?” Promptly came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cretan leader’s answer: “No man here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Thoas, seems blameworthy, for we all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are skilled in war, nor does unmanly fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hold any back; nor from the difficult strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does sloth detain one warrior. So it is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doubtless that it seems good to Saturn’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The All-disposer, that the Greeks, afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Argos, should ingloriously fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And perish. Thoas, thou wert ever brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And didst exhort the laggards. Cease not now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat, cease not to exhort the rest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Neptune, he who shakes the earth, rejoined:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Idomeneus, whoever keeps aloof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From battle, willingly, today, may he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never return from Troy, but be the prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dogs. Take thou thy arms and come with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we must quit ourselves like men, and strive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid our cause, although we be but two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great is the strength of feeble arms combined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we can combat even with the brave.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So speaking, Neptune turned to share the toils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of war. Idomeneus, who now had reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His princely tent, put on his glorious mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seized two spears, and flew upon his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like lightning grasped by Saturn’s son and flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quivering above Olympus’ gleaming peak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sign to mortals, dazzled by the blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So glittered, as he ran, his brazen mail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fellow-warrior, good Meriones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met him beside the tent, for he had come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fetch a brazen javelin thence, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stout Idomeneus addressed his friend:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O son of Molus, swift Meriones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dearest of all my comrades! Why hast thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus left the battle-field? Hast thou a wound⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A weapon’s point that galls thee? Dost thou bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A message to me? Think not that I sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my tent an idler: I must fight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Discreetly did Meriones reply:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Idomeneus, whose sovereign counsels rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The well-armed Cretans, I am come to seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spear if one be left within thy tents.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I broke the one I bore, in hurling it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the shield of fierce Deïphobus.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Cretan chief, Idomeneus, rejoined:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If spears thou seek, there stand within my tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twenty and one against the shining walls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I took them from slain Trojans. ’Tis my wont</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never to fight at distance from the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore have I spears, and bossy shields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And helms, and body-mail of polished brass.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake in turn discreet Meriones:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Within my tent are also many spoils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Won from the Trojans, and in my black ship;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they are far away. I do not think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I forget what valor is. I fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the foremost in the glorious strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where’er the battle calls me. Other men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the well-armed Greeks may not have seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I perform, but thou must know me well.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Idomeneus, the Cretan leader, spake:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I know thy courage well. What need hast thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speak as thou hast done? If all of us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bravest of the Greeks, were set apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To form an ambush;⁠—for an ambush tries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shows men’s valor; there the craven, there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave, is known; the coward’s color comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And goes; his spirit is not calm within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bosom, so that he can rest awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tremble not; he shifts his place; he sits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On both his feet; his heart beats audibly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his breast; his teeth at thought of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chatter; the brave man’s color changes not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor when with other warriors he sits down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ambush is he troubled, but he longs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rise and mingle in the desperate fray;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thee, in such an ambush, none could blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy courage or thy skill. If there the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should wound thee from afar, or smite thee near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon would not strike thy neck behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or pierce thy back, but enter at thy breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or stomach, as thou wert advancing fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the foremost. But enough of this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come! Stand we here no longer, idiot-like,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest someone chide us sharply. Hasten thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bring a sturdy javelin from the tent.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. Meriones, like Mars in port</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swiftness, hastened to the tent and brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A brazen spear, and joined Idomeneus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eager for battle. As the god of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man-destroyer, comes into the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Terror, his strong-limbed and dauntless son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Following and striking fear into the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the most resolute warrior, when from Thrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They issue armed against the Ephyri,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else against the Phlegyans large of soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hearken not to both the hosts, but give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one the victory; so Meriones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advanced to battle with Idomeneus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaders of heroes both, and both equipped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In glittering helms. And first Meriones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake and addressed his fellow-warrior thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son of Deucalion, at which point wilt thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter the throng? Upon the army’s right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its centre, or its left? The long haired Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seem most to need our aid upon the left.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spoke Idomeneus, in turn, the prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Cretans: “At the centre of the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are others who will guard it. Posted there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are either Ajax and the most expert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Grecian archers, Teucer, not less skilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In standing fight, and amply will they task</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arm of Hector, Priam’s son, though bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On desperate conflict, and though passing fierce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all his fierceness, he will find it hard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To quell their prowess, never yet o’ercome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fire the ships, unless Saturnian Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself should cast on them the flaming torch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet will Telamonian Ajax yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To any man of mortal birth, or reared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the grains of Ceres, or whom brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ponderous stones can wound. He would not own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warlike son of Peleus mightier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than he in standing fight, although in speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He vies not with him. Lead us then to join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The army’s left, that we may learn at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether our fate in battle shall confer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glory on other men, or theirs on us.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the chief. Meriones, the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mars in swiftness, hastened till he joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The army where his comrade bade. The foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld Idomeneus, who like a flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swept on with his companion all in arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gloriously wrought; they raised from rank to rank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle-cry, and met him as he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hand to hand, before the galleys’ sterns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was waged the combat. As when storms arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blown up by piping winds, when dust lies loose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the roads, a spreading cloud of dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fills the wide air, so came the battle on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the bands that struggled eagerly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay each other. All along the line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murderous conflict bristled with long spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That tore the flesh; the brazen splendor, shot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From gleaming helmets and from burnished mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shining bucklers, all in narrow space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dazzled the eyes. Brave-hearted would he be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man who, gazing on it, could have seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The furious strife rejoicing or unmoved.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime the potent sons of Saturn each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Favored a different side, and planned new toils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all the warriors, Jupiter had willed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Hector and the Trojans should prevail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet had he not decreed the Achaian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To perish before Troy; he only sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To honor Thetis and her large-souled son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Neptune, mingling with the Greeks, aroused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their martial spirit. From the hoary deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came unmarked, for deeply was he grieved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see the Greeks give way before the host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy, and he was wroth with Jupiter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both gods were of one race, and owed their birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the same parents; but the elder-born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Jupiter, and wiser. For that cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not openly did Neptune aid the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, as by stealth, disguised in human form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved through their army and encouraged them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat. Thus it was the potent twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each drew, with equal hand, the net of strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fearful havoc, which no power could break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or loosen, stretched o’er both the warring hosts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laying many a warrior low in death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, although his brows were strewn with gray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idomeneus, encouraging the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed on the Trojans, and revived the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slew Orthryoneus, who just before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn by the rumor of the war, had left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cabesus, and now made a lover’s suit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Priam’s fairest daughter. Without dower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sought to wed Cassandra, promising</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vast exploit⁠—to drive the Greeks from Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spite of all their valor. The old king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consented that the maiden should be his;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he fought, and trusted to fulfil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His promise. But Idomeneus took aim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast his glittering javelin at the youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It struck him marching proudly on, nor stopped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon at the brazen mail, but pierced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stomach. With a clash the warrior fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the victor boasted over him:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Orthryoneus, I deem thee worthy of praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all other men, if thou perform</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What thou hast undertaken⁠—to defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dardanian Priam, who has promised thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His daughter. We would make a compact too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will perform it⁠—to bestow on thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spouse, the fairest daughter of the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus’ son, and we will send for her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Argos, if thou join us, and lay waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The well built Ilium. Now, then, follow me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the ships which brought us we will treat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of marriage, and will make no niggard terms.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake Idomeneus, and dragged the slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the sharp conflict by the foot. He met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asius, who walked before his car, and came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To avenge his friend. The attending charioteer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind him reined the steeds, that they should breathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the shoulders of their lord, who sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To smite Idomeneus. The Greek was first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strike; he plunged the spear into his throat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below the chin, and drave the weapon through.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan fell to earth as falls an oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poplar, or stately pine, which woodmen fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their sharp axes on the mountain-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To form a galley’s beam. So there he lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretched out before his coursers and his car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gnashed his teeth, and clenched the bloody dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charioteer, amazed, and losing power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of action, dared not turn the horses back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear him from the foe. Antilochus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warlike cast his spear, and in the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transfixed him. Little did the brazen mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avail to stay the blade, which cleft its way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the stomach. With a sudden gasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He toppled from the sumptuous chariot-seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And large-souled Nestor’s son, Antilochus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drave with the chariot to the well-armed Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deïphobus, who sorrowed for the fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Asius, drawing near Idomeneus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurled at him his bright spear. The Greek beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As face to face they stood, and scaped the stroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Covered by his round shield, two-handled, strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With bullocks’ hides and glittering brass. With this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hid himself, close couched within, and turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brazen point aside. The buckler rang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrilly; the weapon glanced away, yet flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not vainly from the Trojan’s powerful hand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It struck Hypsenor, son of Hippasus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd of the people, on the side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where lies the liver, just below the breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His knees gave way; he fell; Deïphobus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus shouted o’er the dead his empty boast:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Not unavenged lies Asius, and no doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In journeying to the massy gates and wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hades, will rejoice that I have sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A soul to be companion of his way.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and at his boast the Greeks were moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With anger⁠—most of all Antilochus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warlike; yet he left not to the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His slain companion, but made haste to hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shield above him. His beloved friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mecisteus, son of Echius, and the prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alastor, lifted up, with many a groan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corpse, and bore it to the roomy ships.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime the valor of Idomeneus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remitted not; he vehemently longed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cover many a Trojan with the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of death, or fall himself with clashing arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In warring to defend the ships of Greece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave Alcathoüs, the beloved son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aesyetus, whom Anchises made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His son-in-law⁠—for he had given to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hippodameia, eldest-born of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His daughters, whom her parents, while she dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With them, loved dearly, fair and wise beyond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All other maidens of her age, and skilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In household arts; so that the noblest prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the broad Trojan kingdom made her his;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him, by the weapon of Idomeneus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Neptune bring to death. The sparkling eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew dim, and stiffened were the shapely limbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For neither could he flee nor turn aside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as he stood before him, column-like,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or like a towering tree, Idomeneus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transfixed him in the bosom with his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brazen coat of mail gave way, which oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had saved him, breaking with a sharp, shrill sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the severing blade. He fell to earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With noise; the spear stood planted in his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as he panted quivered through its length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet soon its murderous force was spent and still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the victor boasted thus aloud:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Deïphobus, does this appear to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fair return, when three are slain for one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hast thou boasted idly? Yet do thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain as thou art, stand forth and face me here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will teach thee of what race I am⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An offshoot of the stock of Jove, whose son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Minos, guardian of our Crete, and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was father of the good Deucalion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deucalion’s son am I, and I am king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er many men in the broad isle of Crete.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My galleys brought me thence to be the dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thee, thy father, and the men of Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. Deïphobus, irresolute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood doubting whether to retreat and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some other of the heroic sons of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid him, or to try the fight alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thus he mused, it seemed most wise to seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas. Him he found withdrawn among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rear of the army, for he was displeased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With noble Priam, who had paid his worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With light esteem. Deïphobus approached,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus with wingèd words accosted him:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Aeneas, counsellor of Troy, if thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hadst ever a regard to him who was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy sister’s husband, it becomes thee now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To avenge him. Follow me, and help avenge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcathoüs, guardian of thy tender years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by the spear of famed Idomeneus.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and at his words Aeneas felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His courage rise. Impatient for the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went to meet Idomeneus; yet fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell not upon the Greek as if he were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A puny boy: he stood and kept his ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, when a mountain boar, unterrified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waits in the wilderness the hunter-crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That come with mighty din, his bristly back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rises, his eyes shoot fire, he whets his tusks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fiercely keeps both dogs and men at bay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So did Idomeneus, expert to wield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear, await Aeneas hastening on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fury. Not a backward step he made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But called upon his warrior-friends aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking at Aphareus, Ascalaphus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deipyrus, Meriones, and last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antilochus, all skilled in arts of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus exhorted them with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Haste hither, O my friends, and bring me aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I stand alone, in dread of the approach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of swift Aeneas, who comes fiercely on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Powerful to slay, and in his prime of youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The highest vigor of the human frame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, were our years the same, that chief or I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would quickly triumph at the other’s cost.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and all with one accord draw near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stood by him, with shields obliquely held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon their shoulders. On the other side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas cheered his comrades on. He fixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His look on Paris, and Deïphobus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nobly born Agenor, who, like him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were leaders of the Trojans. After these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soldiers followed, as the thronging flock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow the ram that leads them to the fount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From pasture, and the shepherd’s heart is pleased.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So was Aeneas glad at heart to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The multitude of warriors following him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then mingled they in battle hand to hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around Alcathoüs, with their ponderous spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fearfully upon their bosoms rang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brass, as through the struggling crowd they aimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their weapons at each other. Two brave men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas and Idomeneus, the peers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mars, conspicuous o’er their fellows, strove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With cruel brass to rend each other’s limbs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And first Aeneas cast his spear to smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idomeneus, who saw it as it came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shunned it. Plunging in the earth beyond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It stood and quivered; it had left in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan’s powerful hand. Idomeneus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next smote Oenomaüs: the spear brake through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hollow corselet at the waist; it pierced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drank the entrails: down amid the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell, and grasped the earth with dying hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idomeneus plucked forth the massy spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, pressed by hostile weapons, ventured not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strip the sumptuous armor from the dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since now no more the sinews of his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were firm to bear him rushing to retake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spear, or start aside from hostile spears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore in standing fight he warded off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The evil hour, nor trusted to his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear him fleetly from the field. He moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly away, and now Deïphobus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who long had hated him and bitterly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aimed at him his bright spear; it missed its mark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And struck Ascalaphus, the son of Mars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon cleft the shoulder of the Greek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who fell amid the dust, and clenched the earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not yet the clamorous Mars, of passionate mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had heard that in the fray his son was slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But on the summit of the Olympian mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat, o’ercanopied by golden clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restrained from combat by the will of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With other gods, forbidden, like himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid the combatants. Meantime around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ascalaphus the combat hand to hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still raged. Deïphobus had torn away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slain man’s shining helm, when suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meriones sprang forward, spear in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote him on the arm; the wounded limb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let fall the helm, resounding as it fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a vulture’s leap Meriones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed toward him, plucking out from the torn flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear, and falling back among the crowd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polites, brother of the wounded, threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both arms around his waist, and bore him off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the loud din of conflict, till he reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His swift-paced steeds, that waited in the rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of battle, with their chariot nobly wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And charioteer. These took him back to Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavily groaning and in pain, the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet gushing from the newly wounded limb.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still fought the other warriors, and the noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a perpetual tumult filled the air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas, rushing upon Aphareus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caletor’s son, who turned to face him, thrust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sharp spear through his throat. With drooping head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And carrying shield and helmet to the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell, and rendered up his soul in death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Antilochus, as Thoön turned away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attacked and smote him, cutting off the vein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That passes through the body to the neck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This he divided sheer; the warrior fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Backward, and lay in dust, with hands outstretched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his beloved friends. Antilochus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew to the slain, and from his shoulders stripped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The armor, casting cautious glances round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While toward him pressed the Trojans on all sides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Striking the fair broad buckler with their darts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet could not even score with pointed brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tender skin of Nestor’s son; for still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neptune, the shaker of the sea-coast, kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watch o’er him while the weapons round him showered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet he withdrew not from his foes, but moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the crowd, nor idle was his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But wielded right and left, and still he watched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With resolute mind the time to strike the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At distance, or assault him near at hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The son of Asius, Adamas, beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero meditating thus, and struck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In close attack, the middle of his shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a sharp brazen spear. The dark-haired god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who rules the deep denied to Adamas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life he sought, and weakened the hard stroke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part of the Trojan’s weapon, like a stake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hardened by fire, stood fixed within the shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part lay on earth, and he who cast it slunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among his comrades to avoid his fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meriones, pursuing with his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote him between the navel and the groin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where deadliest are the wounds in battle given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To man’s unhappy race. He planted there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cruel blade, and Adamas, who fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Writhed panting round it, as a bullock bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By cowherds on the mountain with strong cords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pants as they lead him off against his will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So wounded, Adamas drew heavy breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet not long. The brave Meriones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approaching, plucked the weapon forth, and night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came o’er the eyes of Adamas. At hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood Helenus, and struck Deipyrus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the temple with his ponderous sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thracian make, and cut the three-coned helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away, and dashed it to the ground; it rolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between a Grecian warrior’s feet, who stooped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took it up, while o’er its owner’s eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The darkness gathered. Grieved at this, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus, Menelaus great in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed forward, threatening royal Helenus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He brandished his sharp spear; the Trojan drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bow; advancing, one to hurl a lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one to send an arrow. Priam’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let fly a shaft at Menelaus’ breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bitter missile from the hollow mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glanced off. As when from the broad winnowing-fan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On some wide threshing-floor the swarthy beans,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or vetches, bound before the whistling wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And winnower’s force, so, bounding from the mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gallant Menelaus, flew afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bitter shaft. Then Menelaus, great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle, smote the hand of Helenus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That held the polished bow; the brazen spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed through the hand, and reached the bow, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood fixed, while Helenus, avoiding death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew back among his comrades, with his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held low, and trailing still the ashen stem.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magnanimous Agenor from the wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew forth the blade, and wrapped the hand in wool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carefully twisted, taken from a sling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried by an attendant of the chief.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To meet the glorious Menelaus sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pisander, led by his unhappy fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To perish, Menelaus! by thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that fierce conflict. When the two were near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advancing toward each other, Atreus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took aim amiss; his spear flew far aside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pisander smote the buckler on the arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mighty Menelaus, yet drave not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon through. The broad shield stopped its force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And broke it at the neck; yet hoped he still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For victory, and exulted. Then the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus drew his silver-studded sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sprang upon his foe, who from beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His buckler took a brazen battle-axe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a long stem of polished olive-wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both struck at once. Pisander hewed away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below the crest, the plumèd helmet-cone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus’ son, who smote, above the nose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pisander’s forehead, crashing through the bones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both bleeding eyes dropped to the ground amid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dust; he fell; he writhed; the conqueror,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advancing, set his heel upon his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stripped the armor off, and, boasting, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus shall ye leave unharmed the fleet that brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The knights of Greece, ye treaty-breaking sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilium, never satisfied with war!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet lack ye not still other guilt and shame⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrong done to me, ye dogs! Ye have not feared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wrath of Hospitable Jove, who flings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thunder, and will yet destroy your town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all its towers⁠—ye who, without a cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore off my youthful bride, and heaps of wealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she had given you welcome as our guests.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now ye seek to burn with fire the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With which we cross the ocean, and to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Grecian heroes. Ye shall yet be forced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eager for battle as ye are, to pause.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Father Jupiter, who hast the praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of highest wisdom among gods and men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this is of thy ordering. How hast thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Favored this arrogant crew of Troy, in love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With violence, who never have enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of war and all its many miseries!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All other things soon satisfy desire⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleep, love, and song, and graceful dance, which most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delight in more than warlike toils⁠—yet they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy are never satisfied with war.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So spake the illustrious man, and, having stripped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bloody armor from the dead, he gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spoil to his companions, and rejoined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warriors in the van. Harpalion then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A son of King Pytemenes, with whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He left his home to join the war at Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assaulted him. He never saw again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His native land. Close to Atrides’ shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He struck it in the centre with his lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet could not drive the weapon through the brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And backward shrank, in fear of death, among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrades, looking round him lest some foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should wound him with the spear. Meriones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let fly a brazen arrow after him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, entering his right flank below the bone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed through and cleft the bladder. Down he sank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the shaft struck him, breathing out his life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the arms of his companions. Like a worm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lay extended on the earth; his blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gushed forth, a purple stream, and steeped the soil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The large-souled Paphlagonians came around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And placed him in a chariot, sorrowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore him to the gates of sacred Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father followed weeping, but no hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was raised to avenge the slaughter of his son.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet deeply moved was Paris at his death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he had been Harpalion’s guest among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Paphlagonians. Grieving for the slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sent a brazen arrow from his bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now there was one Euchenor, rich and brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Polyidus, hoary seer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dwelling was in Corinth, and he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forewarned and conscious of his fate, to Troy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For often Polyidus, good old man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warned him that he within his palace halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should perish by a grievous malady,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else be slain by Trojan hands beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Grecian fleet. So, to escape at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The censure of the Achaians and disease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came, lest he in after times might rue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His choice. And now between the jaw and ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Paris smite him; from the warrior’s limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life fled, and darkness gathered o’er his eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then they fought; like a devouring fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That battle was; but Hector, dear to Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not yet learned that on the left the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made havoc of his men; for in that hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks had almost made the victory theirs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So greatly had the god who shakes the shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindled their courage, and with his own arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought timely aid. Still Hector, pressing on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where first he leaped within the gates and wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke the close phalanxes of shielded Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, ranged beside the hoary deep, the ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ajax and Protesilaüs lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wall that guarded them was low, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warriors and steeds in fiercest conflict met;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the Boeotians, there in their long robes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Iaonians, there the Locrians, there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men of Phthia, and the Epeians famed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For valor, held back Hector, struggling on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reach the ships, yet found they had no power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive the noble warrior from the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he was like a flame. The chosen men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Athens formed the van. Menestheus, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peteus, was their leader, after whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phidas and Stichius followed, and with them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gallant Bias. Meges, Phyleus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Dracius and Amphion, marshalled there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Epeians; while the Phthian band were led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Medon and Podarces, warlike chief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Medon was the great Oileus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brother of the lesser Ajax, born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the tie of wedlock, and he dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from his native land, in Phylacè;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For by his violent hand the brother died</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Eryopis, whom Oileus made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lawful spouse. Podarces was the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Iphiclus, and dwelt in Phylacè.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These, at the head of Phthia’s valiant youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cased in massive armor, fought beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boeotia’s warriors for the Grecian fleet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Ajax swift of foot, Oileus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From him of Telamon departed not as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even for an instant. As when two black steers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of equal vigor o’er a fallow draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strongly jointed plough, till near their horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streams the warm sweat; the polished yoke alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holds them asunder, as they move along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The furrow, and the share divides the soil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lies between them;⁠—so the heroic twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept near each other. Many men and brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed to Troy the son of Telamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As his companions, and, when weariness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came o’er his sweaty limbs, relieved their chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his broad buckler. But the Locrian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attended not Oileus’ great-souled son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor could they ever venture to engage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In combat hand to hand. No brazen helms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were theirs, with horse-hair plumes, no orbèd shields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ashen spears. They came with him to Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trusting in their good bows, and in their slings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of twisted wool, from which they showered afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stones that dispersed the phalanxes of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chieftains Ajax, warring in the van,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clad in their shining armor, fought to check</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans and their leader, brazen-mailed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While in the rear the Locrians lurked unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sent their shafts, so that the men of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All order lost, were fain to cease from fight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then had the Trojans from the ships and tents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned back, and fled, with fearful loss of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lofty Ilium, if Polydamas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not accosted valiant Hector thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hector, thou hearkenest not to warning words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deem’st thou, because a god has given thee strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all other men for feats of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That therefore thou art wiser than they all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council? Think not for thyself to claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All gifts at once. On one the god bestows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prowess in war, upon another grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dance, upon another skill to touch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The harp and sing. In yet another, Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Thunderer implants the prudent mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By which the many profit, and by which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Communities are saved; and well doth he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hath it know its worth. Now let me speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What seems to me the wisest. Round thee flames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The encircling war; the valiant sons of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since they have crossed the ramparts, stand aloof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed as they are, or fight against large odds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattered among the galleys. Yield thou now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ground, and, summoning the chiefs, decide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What plan to follow⁠—whether we shall storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The well-oared galleys, should the God vouchsafe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victory to us⁠—or else depart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In safety from the fleet. I greatly fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians may repay to us the debt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of yesterday. There yet is at the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One who, I think, no longer will refrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wholly from battle.” Thus Polydamas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake, and the sage advice pleased Hector well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, leaping from his chariot to the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all his weapons, said these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Remain with all the bravest warriors here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polydamas, while I depart to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The due commands, and instantly return.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and with a shout he rushed away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seen from afar, like a snow-mountain’s peak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flew among the Trojans and allies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who crowded round the brave Polydamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Panthoüs, at Hector’s call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the foremost combatants he sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deïphobus, and mighty Helenus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king; he looked for Adamas, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Asius, and for Asius of the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hyrtacus. Some not unharmed he found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not o’ercome; while others lay in death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the galley sterns, where Grecian hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had slain them; others on the wall, struck down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By missiles, or in combat hand to hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There on the left of that disastrous fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He met the noble Alexander, spouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fair-haired Helen, as he cheered his men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rallied them to battle. Hector thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Addressed his brother with reproachful words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Accursed Paris! Noble but in form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Effeminate seducer! Where are now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deïphobus, and mighty Helenus?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Adamas, the son of Asius, where?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Asius, son of Hyrtacus? and where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orthryoneus? Now towering Ilium sinks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her high summit, and thy fate is sure.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the godlike Paris answered thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Since it hath pleased thee, Hector, thus to cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reproach on me, though innocent, I may</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another day neglect the toils of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although in truth my mother brought me forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not quite unapt for combat. Since the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou didst lead the battle to the ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy companions, we have held our ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here on this spot, contending with the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three chiefs for whom thou askest have been slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deïphobus and mighty Helenus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both wounded in the hand by massive spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have left the field; the son of Saturn saved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lives. Now lead us wheresoe’er thou wilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we will follow thee with resolute hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor deem that thou wilt find in us a lack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of valor while our strength of arm remains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boldest cannot tight beyond his strength.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With such persuasive words the warrior calmed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother’s anger, and they went where raged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hottest conflict round Cebriones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phalces, Ortbasus, and the excellent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polydamas, with Palmys at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Polyphoetes, godlike in his form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where Ascanius and Morys fought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sons of Hippotion. They the day before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came marching from Ascania’s fertile fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved by the will of Jove to share the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All these swept on, as when a hurricane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thunder-gust, from Father Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buffets the plain, and mingles with the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mighty uproar, and the billows rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All over the resounding brine, and swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whitening with foam, and chase each other on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So moved the Trojans on, man after man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In close array, all armed in glittering brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Following their generals. Hector, Priam’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And peer of Mars in battle, led the van,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His round shield held before him, tough with hides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And overlaid with brass. Upon his brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gleaming helmet nodded as he moved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On every side he tried the phalanxes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If haply they might yield to his assault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made from beneath that buckler; but the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spirit or in order wavered not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ajax, striding forth, defied him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Draw nearer, friend! Think’st thou to frighten thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks? We are not quite so inexpert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In war, although so cruelly chastised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Jupiter. Thou thinkest in thy heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou shalt make our ships thy spoil; but we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have also our strong arms to drive thee back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And far more soon the populous town of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Captured and sacked, shall fall by Grecian hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I warn thee that the hour is near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, fleeing, thou shalt pray to Father Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the immortals, that thy long-maned steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing thee townward mid a cloud of dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the plain, may be more swift than hawks.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he spake, an eagle, to the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High in the middle heaven, flew over him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, gladdened by the omen, all the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouted; but then illustrious Hector spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Babbler and boaster, what wild words are these?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Ajax! Would that I were but as sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be the child of aegis-bearing Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought forth by Juno the august, and held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In honor everywhere like that which crowns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo and Minerva, as I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That to the Greeks this very day will bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Destruction, and that thou shalt also lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain with the others, if thou dare abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stroke of my long spear, which yet shall tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy dainty flesh, and thou, with thy full limbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shalt be the feast of Trojan dogs and birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unburied by the galleys of the Greeks.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Hector spake, and led his warriors on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They followed with a mighty shout; the rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent up as loud a cry. On the other side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouted the Greeks, nor intermitted now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their wonted valor, but stood firm to breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The onset of the chosen men of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mingled clamor of both hosts went up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To heaven, and to the shining seat of Jove.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
