<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 6: Interviews Between Glaucus and Diomed, and Hector and Andromache</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Interviews Between Glaucus and Diomed, and Hector and Andromache</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Successes of the Greeks.⁠—Hector recalled to Troy by Helenus, to appoint a Procession of the Trojan Matrons to the Temple of Minerva.⁠—Meeting of Glaucus and Diomed, who recognize each other as old Friends.⁠—Their Exchange of Weapons.⁠—Meeting of Hector and Andromache, and Return of Hector and Paris to the Field.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-6" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Now from that stubborn conflict of the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Trojans had the gods withdrawn. The fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of men encountering men with brazen spears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still raged from place to place upon the plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the Xanthus and the Simoïs.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And first of all did Ajax Telamon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bulwark of the Achaians, break the ranks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Troy and raise the hopes of those who fought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside him; for he smote the bravest man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the Thracian warriors⁠—Acamas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Son of Eussorus, strong and large of limb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spear-head, through the plumèd helmet’s cone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entering the forehead of the Thracian, pierced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bone, and darkness gathered o’er his eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The valiant Diomed slew Axylus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son of Teuthras. To the war he came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From nobly-built Arisba; great his wealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greatly was he loved, for courteously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He welcomed to his house beside the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All comers. None of these could interpose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between him and his death, for Diomed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slew him and his,attendant charioteer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calysius; both went down below the earth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And then Euryalus struck Dresus down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And smote Opheltius, and went on to slay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aesepus and his brother Pedasus;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A river-nymph, Abarbareia, bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both children to Bucolion the renowned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bucolion was the eldest of the sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of great Laomedon. His mother reared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The boy in secret. While he fed his sheep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with the river-nymph was joined in love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And marriage, and she bore him twins; and these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brave and of shapely limb, Mecisteus’ son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struck down, and from their shoulders tore the mail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warlike Polypoetes overthrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Astyalus; Ulysses smote to earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pidytes the Percosian with the spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Teucer Aretaon, nobly born.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glittering javelin of Antilochus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son of Nestor, laid Ablerus low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Agamemnon, king of men, struck down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Elatus, who on lofty Pedasus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dwelt, by the smoothly flowing Satnio’s stream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brave Leitus slew Phylacus in flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by Eurypylus Melanthius fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then valiant Menelaus took alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adrastus, whose two coursers, as they scoured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The plain in terror, struck against a branch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of tamarisk, and, there entangled, snapped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chariot pole, and, breaking from it, fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither were others fleeing. From the car</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adrastus to the dust beside the wheel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell, on his face. There, lifting his huge spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Atrides Menelaus o’er him stood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adrastus clasped the warrior’s knees and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O son of Atreus, take me prisoner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt have large ransom. In the house</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my rich father ample treasures lie⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brass, gold, and tempered steel⁠—and he shall send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gifts without end when he shall hear that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am spared alive and in the Grecian fleet.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and moved the conqueror, who now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was minded to give charge that one among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His comrades to the Grecian fleet should lead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The captive. Agamemnon came in haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, lifting up his voice, rebuked him thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O Menelaus, soft of heart, why thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou concerned for men like these? In sooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great are the benefits thy household owes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojans. Nay, let none of them escape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The doom of swift destruction by our hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very babe within his mother’s womb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even that must die, and all of Ilium born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perish unburied, utterly cut off.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake; the timely admonition changed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The purpose of his brother, who thrust back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The suppliant hero with his hand; and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>King Agamemnon smote him through the loins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prone on earth he fell. Upon the breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the slain man Atrides placed his heel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the body drew the ashen spear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Nestor to the Argives called aloud:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Friends, Grecian heroes, ministers of Mars!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let no man here through eagerness for spoil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Linger behind the rest, that he may bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much plunder to the ships; but let us first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strike down our enemies, and afterward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At leisure strip the bodies of the dead.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus speaking, he revived in every breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Courage and zeal. Then had the men of Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sought refuge from the Greeks within their walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’ercome by abject fear, if Helenus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son of Priam, and of highest note</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the augurs, had not made his way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Hector and Aeneas, speaking thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O Hector and Aeneas, since on you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is laid the mighty labor to command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojans and the Lycians⁠—for the first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are ye in battle, and in council first⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here make your stand, and haste from side to side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rallying your scattered ranks, lest they betake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Themselves to flight, and, rushing to their wives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Become the scorn and laughter of the foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, so soon as ye shall have revived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The courage of your men, we here will bide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The conflict with the Greeks, though closely pressed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For so we must. But, Hector, thou depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Troy and seek the mother of us both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bid her call the honored Trojan dames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where the blue-eyed Pallas has her fane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the high citadel, and with a key</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open the hallowed doors, and let her bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What she shall deem the fairest of the robes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And amplest, in her palace, and the one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She prizes most, and lay it on the knees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the bright-haired Minerva. Let her make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vow to offer to the goddess there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve yearling heifers that have never borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The yoke, if she in mercy will regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The city, and the wives and little ones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of its defenders; if she will protect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our sacred Ilium from the ruthless son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Tydeus, from whose valor armies flee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whom I deem the bravest of the Greeks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For not so greatly have we held in dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles, the great leader, whom they call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goddess-born; but terrible in wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is Diomed, nor hath his peer in might.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and Hector of his brother’s words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was not unmindful. Instantly he leaped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Armèd, from his chariot, shaking his sharp spears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And everywhere among the host he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exhorting them to combat manfully;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus he kindled the fierce fight anew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They, turning from the flight, withstood the Greeks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Greeks fell back and ceased to slay; they thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one of the immortals had come down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out the starry heaven to help the men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Troy, so suddenly they turned and fought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Hector to the Trojans called aloud:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O valiant sons of Troy, and ye allies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Summoned from far! Be men, my friends; call back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your wonted valor, while I go to Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ask the aged men, our counsellors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all our wives, to come before the gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pray and offer vows of sacrifice.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So the plumèd Hector spake, and then withdrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the black fell that edged his bossy shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struck on his neck and ankles as he went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now came into the midst between the hosts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glaucus, the offspring of Hippolochus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And met the son of Tydeus⁠—both intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On combat. But when now the twain were near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ready to engage, brave Diomed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spake first, and thus addressed his enemy:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Who mayst thou be, of mortal men? Most brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou, yet never in the glorious fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have I beheld thee. Thou surpassest now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All others in thy daring, since thou com’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the reach of my long spear. The sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of most unhappy men are they who meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My arm; but⁠—if thou comest from above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A god⁠—I war not with the gods of heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For even brave Lycurgus lived not long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son of Dryas, who engaged in strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the celestial gods. He once pursued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nurses of the frantic Bacchus through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hallowed ground of Nyssa. All at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They flung to earth their sacred implements,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycurgus the man-slayer beating them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an ox-driver’s goad. Then Bacchus fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plunged into the sea, where Thetis hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trembler in her bosom, for he shook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With panic at the hero’s angry threats.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thenceforward were the blessed deities</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wroth with Lycurgus. Him did Saturn’s son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strike blind, and after that he lived not long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he was held in hate by all the gods.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So will I never with the gods contend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if thou be indeed of mortal race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nourished by the fruits of earth, draw near;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And quickly shalt thou pass the gates of death.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hippolochus’s son, the far-renowned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made answer thus: “O large-souled Diomed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why ask my lineage? Like the race of leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is that of humankind. Upon the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The winds strew one year’s leaves; the sprouting grove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Puts forth another brood, that shoot and grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the spring season. So it is with man:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One generation grows while one decays.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet since thou takest heed of things like these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And askest whence I sprang⁠—although to most</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My birth is not unknown⁠—there is a town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lapped in the pasture-grounds where graze the steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Argos, Ephyra by name, and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dwelt Sisyphus bolides, most shrewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of men; his son was Glaucus, and the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Glaucus was the good Bellerophon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom the gods gave beauty and the grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of winning manners. Proetus sought his death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And banished him, for Proetus was the chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Argives; Jupiter had made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That people subject to his rule. The wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Proetus, nobly-born Anteia, sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With passionate desire his secret.love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But failed to entice, with all her blandishments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The virtuous and discreet Bellerophon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore went she to Proetus with a lie⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Die, Proetus, thou, or put Bellerophon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To death, for he has offered force to me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The monarch hearkened, and was moved to wrath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then he would not slay him, for his soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revolted at the deed; he sent him thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Lycia, with a fatal tablet, sealed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With things of deadly import writ therein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meant for Anteia’s father, in whose hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bellerophon must place it, and be made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To perish. So at Lycia he arrived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the favoring guidance of the gods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he came where Lycian Xanthus flows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The king of that broad realm received his guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hospitable welcome, feasting him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nine days, and offering up in sacrifice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nine oxen. But when rosy-fingered Morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appeared for the tenth time, he questioned him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade him show the token he had brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Proetus. When the monarch had beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fatal tablet from his son-in-law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first command he gave him was, to slay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven-born Chimaera, the invincible.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No human form was hers: a lion she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In front, a dragon in the hinder parts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the midst a goat, and terribly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her nostrils breathed a fierce, consuming flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, trusting in the portents of the gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He slew her. Then it was his second task</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To combat with the illustrious Solymi⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hardest battle he had ever fought⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So he declared⁠—with men; and then he slew⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His third exploit⁠—the man-like Amazons.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he returned to Lycia; on his way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monarch laid a treacherous snare. He chose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his wide Lycian realm the bravest men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lie in ambush for him. Never one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these came home again⁠—Bellerophon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The matchless slew them all. And when the king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw that he was the offspring of a god,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He kept him near him, giving him to wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His daughter, and dividing with him all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His kingly honors, while the Lycians set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their richest fields apart⁠—a goodly spot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ploughlands and vineyards⁠—for the prince to till.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she who now became his wife brought forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three children to the sage Bellerophon⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Isandrus and Hippolochus; and, last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laodameia, who in secret bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all-providing Jupiter a son⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Godlike Sarpedon, eminent in arms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when Bellerophon upon himself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had drawn the anger of the gods, he roamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Alcian fields alone, a prey to thoughts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wasted him, and shunning every haunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of humankind. The god whose lust of strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is never sated, Mars, cut off his son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Isandrus, warring with the illustrious race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Solymi; and Dian, she who guides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her car with golden reins, in anger slew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His daughter. I am of Hippolochus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From him I claim my birth. He sent me forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Troy with many counsels and commands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever to bear myself like a brave man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And labor to excel, and never bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dishonor on the stock from which I sprang⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bravest stock by far in Ephyra</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the wide realm of Lycia. ’T is my boast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be of such a race and such a blood.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake. The warlike Diomed was glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, planting in the foodful earth his spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Addressed the people’s shepherd blandly thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Most surely thou art my ancestral guest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For noble CEneus once within his halls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Received the blameless chief Bellerophon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kept him twenty days, and they bestowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gifts on each other, such as host and guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exchange; a purple baldric Oeneus gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dazzling color, and Bellerophon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A double golden goblet; this I left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within my palace when I came to Troy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Tydeus I remember nothing, since</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He left me, yet a little child, and went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Thebes, where perished such a host of Greeks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Henceforward I will be thy host and friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Argos; thou shalt be the same to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Lycia when I visit Lycia’s towns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let us in the tumult of the fray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Avoid each other’s spears, for there will be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Trojans and of their renowned allies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enough for me to slay whene’er a god</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall bring them in my way. In turn for thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are many Greeks to smite whomever thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Canst overcome. Let us exchange our arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even these may see that thou and I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Regard each other as ancestral guests.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus having said, and leaping from their cars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They clasped each other’s hands and pledged their faith.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then did the son of Saturn take away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The judging mind of Glaucus, when he gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His arms of gold away for arms of brass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worn by Tydides Diomed⁠—the worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fivescore oxen for the worth of nine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now had Hector reached the Scaean gates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beechen tree. Around him flocked the wives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And daughters of the Trojans eagerly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tidings of sons and brothers they required,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And friends and husbands. He admonished all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Duly to importune the gods in prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For woe, he said, was near to many a one.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And then he came to Priam’s noble hall⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A palace built with graceful porticos,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fifty chambers near each other, walled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With polished stone, the rooms of Priam’s’sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of their wives; and opposite to these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve chambers for his daughters, also near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each other; and, with polished marble walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sleeping-rooms of Priam’s sons-in-law</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their unblemished consorts. There he met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His gentle mother on her way to seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her fairest child, Laodice. She took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hand and held it fast, while thus she spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Why art thou come, my child, and why hast left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The raging fight? Full hard these hateful Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press us, in fighting round the city-walls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy heart, I know, hath moved thee to repair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To our high citadel, and lift thy hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In prayer to Jupiter. But stay thou here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I bring pleasant wine, that thou mayst pour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A part to Jove and to the other gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drink and be refreshed; for wine restores</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strength to the weary, and I know that thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art weary, fighting for thy countrymen.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great Hector of the crested helm replied:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My honored mother, bring not pleasant wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest that unman me, and my wonted might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And valor leave me. I should fear to pour us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark wine to Jupiter with hands unwashed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor is it fitting that a man like me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Defiled with blood and battle-dust, should make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vows to the cloud-compeller, Saturn’s son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou, with incense, seek the temple reared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Pallas the despoiler⁠—calling first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our honored dames together. Take with thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thou shalt deem the fairest of the robes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And amplest, in thy palace, and the one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou prizest most, and lay it on the knees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the bright-haired Minerva. Make a vow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To offer to the goddess in her fane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve yearling heifers that have never borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The yoke, if she in mercy will regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The city, and the wives and little ones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of its defenders; if she will protect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our sacred Ilium from the ruthless son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Tydeus, from whose valor armies flee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So to the shrine of Pallas, warrior-queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do thou repair, while I depart to seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paris, if he will listen to my voice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would that the earth might open where he stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swallow him! Olympian Jupiter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reared him to be the bane of all who dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Troy, to large-souled Priam and his sons.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could I behold him sinking to the shades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart would lose its sense of bitter woe.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake. His mother, turning homeward, gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charge to her handmaids, who through all the town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passed, summoning the matrons, while the queen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descended to her chamber, where the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was sweet with perfumes, and in which were laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her rich embroidered robes, the handiwork</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Sidon’s damsels, whom her son had brought⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The godlike Alexander⁠—from the coast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Sidon, when across the mighty deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sailed and brought the high born Helen thence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One robe, most beautiful of all, she chose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bring to Pallas, ampler than the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many-hued; it glistened like a star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lay beneath them all. Then hastily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She left the chamber with the matron train.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They reached Minerva’s temple, and its gates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were opened by Theano, rosy-cheeked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The knight Antenor’s wife and Cisseus’ child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made priestess to the goddess by the sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Troy. Then all the matrons lifted up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their voices and stretched forth their suppliant hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Pallas, while the fair Theano took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The robe and spread its folds upon the lap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fair-haired Pallas, and with solemn vows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prayed to the daughter of imperial Jove:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O venerated Pallas, Guardian-Power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Troy, great goddess! shatter thou the lance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Diomed, and let him fall in death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the Scaean gates, that we forthwith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May offer to thee in thy temple here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve yearling heifers that have never worn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The yoke, if thou wilt pity us and spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wives of Trojans and their little ones.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake she, supplicating; but her prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Minerva answered not; and while they made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vows to the daughter of Almighty Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hector was hastening to the sumptuous home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Alexander, which that prince had built</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With aid of the most cunning architects</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Troy the fruitful, by whose hands were made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bed-chamber and hall and ante-room.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There entered Hector, dear to Jove; he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hand a spear eleven cubits long:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brazen spear-head glittered brightly, bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a gold circle. In his room he there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found Paris, busied with his shining arms⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Corselet and shield; he tried his curved bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Argive Helen with the attendant maids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was sitting, and appointed each a task.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hector beheld, and chid him sharply thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Strange man! a fitting time indeed is this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To indulge thy sullen humor, while in fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around our lofty walls the men of Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are perishing, and for thy sake the war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is fiercely blazing all around our town.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wouldst thyself reprove him, shouldst thou see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another warrior as remiss as thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In time of battle. Rouse thee, then, and act,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest we behold our city all in flames.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then answered Paris of the godlike form:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hector! although thou justly chidest me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not beyond my due, yet let me speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attend and hearken. Not in sullenness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor angry with the Trojans, sat I here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within my chamber, but that I might give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A loose to sorrow. Even now my wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gentle speeches has besought of me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I return to battle; and to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seems the best, for oft doth victory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Change sides in war. Remain thou yet awhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I put on my armor; or go thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I shall follow and rejoin thee soon.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He ended. Hector of the beamy helm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heard him, and answered not; but Helen spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus with soothing words addressed the chief:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Brother-in-law⁠—for such thou art, though I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am lost to shame, and cause of many ills⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would that some violent blast when I was born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had whirled me to the mountain wilds, or waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the hoarse sea, that they might swallow me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere deeds like these were done! But since the gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have thus decreed, why was I not the wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of one who bears a braver heart and feels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keenly the anger and reproach of men?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Paris hath not, and will never have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A resolute mind, and must abide the effect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his own folly. Enter thou meanwhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My brother; seat thee here, for heavily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must press on thee the labors thou dost bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one so vile as I, and for the sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of guilty Paris. An unhappy lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Jupiter’s appointment, waits us both⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A theme of song for men in time to come.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great Hector of the beamy helm replied:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay, Helen, ask me not to sit; thy speech</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is courteous, but persuades me not. My mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is troubled for the Trojans, to whose aid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hasten, for they miss me even now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou exhort this man, and bid him haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To overtake me ere I leave the town.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I go to my own mansion first, to meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My household⁠—my dear wife and little child;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor know I whether I may come once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To them, or whether the great gods ordain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I must perish by the hands of Greeks.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake the plumèd Hector, and withdrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reached his pleasant palace, but found not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White-armed Andromache within, for she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was in the tower, beside her little son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well-robed nurse, and sorrowed, shedding tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hector, seeing that his blameless wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was not within, came forth again, and stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the threshold questioning the maids.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I pray you, damsels, tell me whither went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White-armed Andromache? Has she gone forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seek my sisters, or those stately dames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My brothers’ wives? Or haply has she sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The temple of Minerva, where are met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other bright-haired matrons of the town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To supplicate the dreaded deity?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then said the diligent housewife in reply:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Since thou wilt have the truth⁠—thy wife is gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to thy sisters, nor those stately dames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy brothers’ wives; nor went she forth to join</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other bright-haired matrons of the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where in Minerva’s temple they are met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To supplicate the dreaded deity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to the lofty tower of Troy she went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it was told her that the Trojan troops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lost heart, and that the valor of the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prevailed. She now is hurrying toward the walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one distracted, with her son and nurse.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake the matron. Hector left in haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mansion, and retraced his way between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rows of stately dwellings, traversing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty city. When at length he reached</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Scaean gates, that issue on the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spouse, the nobly-dowered Andromache,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came forth to meet him⁠—daughter of the prince</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eëtion, who, among the woody slopes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Placos, in the Hypoplacian town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Thebè, ruled Cilicia and her sons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave his child to Hector great in arms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She came attended by a maid, who bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tender child⁠—a babe too young to speak⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her bosom⁠—Hector’s only son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful as a star, whom Hector called</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scamandrius, but all else Astyanax⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The city’s lord⁠—since Hector stood the sole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Defence of Troy. The father on his child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looked with a silent smile. Andromache</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pressed to his side meanwhile, and, all in tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clung to his hand, and, thus beginning, said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Too brave! thy valor yet will cause thy death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast no pity on thy tender child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor me, unhappy one, who soon must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy widow. All the Greeks will rush on thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take thy life. A happier lot were mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I must lose thee, to go down to earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I shall have no hope when thou art gone⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing but sorrow. Father have I none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no dear mother. Great Achilles slew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My father when he sacked the populous town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Cilicians⁠—Thebè with high gates.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T was there he smote Eëtion, yet forbore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make his arms a spoil; he dared not that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But burned the dead with his bright armor on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And raised a mound above him. Mountain-nymphs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daughters of aegis-bearing Jupiter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came to the spot and planted it with elms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seven brothers had I in my father’s house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all went down to Hades in one day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles the swift-footed slew them all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among their slow-paced bullocks and white sheep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mother, princess on the woody slopes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Placos, with his spoils he bore away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only for large ransom gave her back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But her Diana, archer-queen, struck down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within her father’s palace. Hector, thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art father and dear mother now to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brother and my youthful spouse besides.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pity keep within the fortress here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor make thy child an orphan nor thy wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A widow. Post thine army near the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the wild fig-tree, where the city-walls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are low and may be scaled. Thrice in the war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The boldest of the foe have tried the spot⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Ajaces and the famed Idomeneus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The two chiefs born to Atreus, and the brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tydides, whether counselled by some seer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or prompted to the attempt by their own minds.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then answered Hector, great in war: “All this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bear in mind, dear wife; but I should stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ashamed before the men and long-robed dames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Troy, were I to keep aloof and shun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The conflict, coward-like. Not thus my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prompts me, for greatly have I learned to dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strike among the foremost sons of Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upholding my great father’s fame and mine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet well in my undoubting mind I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day shall come in which our sacred Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Priam, and the people over whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spear-bearing Priam rules, shall perish all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not the sorrows of the Trojan race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor those of Hecuba herself, nor those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of royal Priam, nor the woes that wait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My brothers many and brave⁠—who all at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slain by the pitiless foe, shall lie in dust⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grieve me so much as thine, when some mailed Greek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall lead thee weeping hence, and take from thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy day of freedom. Thou in Argos then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shalt, at another’s bidding, ply the loom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the fountain of Messeis draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Water, or from the Hypereian spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Constrained unwilling by thy cruel lot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then shall some one say who sees thee weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘This was the wife of Hector, most renowned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the horse-taming Trojans, when they fought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around their city.’ So shall some one say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt grieve the more, lamenting him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who haply might have kept afar the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy captivity. O, let the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be heaped above my head in death before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hear thy cries as thou art borne away!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So speaking, mighty Hector stretched his arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take the boy; the boy shrank crying back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his fair nurse’s bosom, scared to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His father helmeted in glittering brass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eying with affright the horse-hair plume</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That grimly nodded from the lofty crest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this both parents in their fondness laughed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hastily the mighty Hector took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The helmet from his brow and laid it down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gleaming upon the ground, and, having kissed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His darling son and tossed him up in play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prayed thus to Jove and all the gods of heaven:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O Jupiter and all ye deities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vouchsafe that this my son may yet become</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Trojans eminent like me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nobly rule in Ilium. May they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘This man is greater than his father was!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they behold him from the battle-field</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bring back the bloody spoil of the slain foe⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That so his mother may be glad at heart.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So speaking, to the arms of his dear spouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gave the boy; she on her fragrant breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Received him, weeping as she smiled. The chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beheld, and, moved with tender pity, smoothed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her forehead gently with his hand and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Sorrow not thus, beloved one, for me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No living man can send me to the shades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before my time; no man of woman born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coward or brave, can shun his destiny.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But go thou home, and tend thy labors there⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The web, the distaff⁠—and command thy maids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speed the work: The cares of war pertain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all men born in Troy, and most to me.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus speaking, mighty Hector took again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His helmet, shadowed with the horse-hair plume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While homeward his beloved consort went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft looking back, and shedding many tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon was she in the spacious palace-halls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the min-queller Hector. There she found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A troop of maidens⁠—with them all she shared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her grief; and all in his own house bewailed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The living Hector, whom they thought no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see returning from the battle-field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Safe from the rage and weapons of the Greeks,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nor waited Paris in his lofty halls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when he had put on his glorious arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glittering with brass, he traversed with quick steps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The city; and as when some courser, fed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With barley in the stall, and wont to bathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In some smooth-flowing river, having snapped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His halter, gayly scampers o’er the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the pride of beauty bears aloft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head, and gives his tossing mane to stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his shoulders, while his flying feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bear him to where the mares are wont to graze⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So came the son of Priam⁠—Paris⁠—down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From lofty Pergamus in glittering arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, glorious as the sun, held on his way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exulting and with rapid feet. He found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His noble brother Hector as he turned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leave the place in which his wife and he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had talked together. Alexander then⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of godlike form⁠—addressed his brother thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My elder brother! I have kept thee here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waiting, I fear, for me, though much in haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And came less quickly than thou didst desire.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Hector of the plumèd helm replied:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Strange being, no man justly can dispraise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy martial deeds, for thou art truly brave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But oft art thou remiss and wilt not join</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The combat. I am sad at heart to hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojans⁠—they who suffer for thy sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand hardships⁠—speak so ill of thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet let us go: we will confer of this ino</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another time, if Jove should e’er vouchsafe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to the immortal gods of heaven we pour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In our own halls the cup of liberty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we have chased the well-armed Greeks from Troy.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
