<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book XVII: The Seventh Battle</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-17" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Seventh Battle</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Contest for the body of Patroclus, which is guarded by Menelaus⁠—Death of Euphorbus⁠—Retreat of Menelaus, and his return with Ajax, after which Hector is obliged to give way⁠—Hector reproved for this by Glaucus⁠—He puts on the armor of Patroclus, and renews the contest, driving back the Greeks⁠—Rally of the Greeks by Ajax⁠—Bravery of Aeneas⁠—Flight of Automedon with the horses and chariot of Patroclus⁠—The defenders of the body of Patroclus involved in darkness, which is dispelled at the prayer of Ajax⁠—A message sent to Achilles informing him of the death of Patroclus, whose body is rescued and borne off by Menelaus and Meriones.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>The warlike Menelaus, Atreus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld Patroclus fall by Trojan hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came in glittering armor to the van</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guard the body of the slain. As walks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heifer moaning round her new-born young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fair-haired Menelaus stalked around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The body of Patroclus, holding forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spear and great round shield, intent to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoever came against him. But the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Panthoüs, mighty spearman, not the less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Intent to spoil the illustrious dead, drew near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spake to warlike Menelaus thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Atrides Menelaus, reared by Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leader of thy host, give way and leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead, and quit to me his bloody spoil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For none of our brave Trojans and allies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote him in deadly combat with the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before me. Leave me therefore to receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glory due me from the sons of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else will I smite thee too, and thou wilt lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy precious life!” Indignant at the word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-haired Menelaus answered him:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Father Jove! Unseemly boasts are these!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For not the panther’s nor the lion’s might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor that of the fierce forest-boar whose rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is heightened into fury, is as great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As that which these distinguished spearmen, sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Panthoüs, utter with their lips. And yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horseman Hyperenor did not long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enjoy his youth when he with insolent words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assailed me, and withstood me⁠—when he said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I was the most craven wretch who bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arms in the Grecian host. He never turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think, his footsteps homeward to delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His reverend parents and beloved wife;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I, like his, will take thy life, if thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oppose me. Heed my counsel, and withdraw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the crowd, and so avoid my stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before thou come to harm. He is a fool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who only sees the mischiefs that are past.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He said: Euphorbus, heeding not his words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of warning, spake again: “Now is my time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove-nurtured Menelaus, to avenge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My brother, slain by thee, and over whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou utteredst such swelling words, whose wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her new bridal chamber thou hast made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A widow, and upon her parents brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mourning and endless sorrow. It may make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sorrow less, should I into the hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Panthoüs and the noble Phrontis give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy head and armor. Let us now delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strife no longer: it will show with whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The valor dwells, and who is moved by fear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and smote his enemy’s round shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But pierced it not; the stubborn metal turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weapon’s point. Then Menelaus, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus, with a prayer to Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck, as Euphorbus made a backward step,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His throat, and drave the weapon with strong hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the soft neck. He fell with clashing arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His locks, which were like those the Graces wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ringlets, bound with gold and silver bands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were drenched with blood. As when some husbandman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rears in a lonely and well-watered spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An olive-tree with widely spreading boughs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful with fresh shoots, and putting forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White blossoms, gently waved by every wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sudden blast descends with mighty sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tears it from its bed, and lays it prone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the earth⁠—so lay Euphorbus, skilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wield the spear and son of Panthoüs, slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spoiled by Menelaus, Atreus’ son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a lion of the mountain wilds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearless and strong, bears from the browsing herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fairest of the kine, and breaks her neck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his strong teeth, and, tearing her, devours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bloody entrails, while a clamorous throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dogs and herdsmen, with incessant cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gather around him, yet approach him not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withheld by fear, so of the warriors round so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gallant Menelaus none could find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The courage to encounter him; and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides easily had borne away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sumptuous armor worn by Panthoüs’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If envious Apollo had not moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector to meet him. Putting on the form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mentes, chief of the Ciconian band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said to him aloud, with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hector, thou art pursuing what thy feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will never overtake, the steeds which draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chariot of Achilles. Hard it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For mortal man to tame them or to guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save for Achilles, goddess-born. Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath warlike Menelaus, Atreus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guarding the slain Patroclus, overthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Euphorbus, bravest of the Trojan host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A son of Panthoüs; he will fight no more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus spake the god, and disappeared among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warring squadrons. Bitter was the grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That seized the heart of Hector as he looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the ranks and saw the Greek bear off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sumptuous arms, and saw the Trojan lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weltering in blood. At once he made his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the front rank, all armed in glittering brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with loud shouts. As terrible he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Vulcan’s inextinguishable fires.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Atreus heard that mighty shout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus to his great soul lamenting said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If I abandon these rich spoils and leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus, who has perished in my cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fear the Greeks will look upon the act</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With indignation. If, through dread of shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fight alone with Hector and his men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fear to be o’erwhelmed by multitudes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For crested Hector leads the whole array</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trojans hither. Yet why question thus?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when a warrior ventures to assault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One whom a god protects, a bitter doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is his. Then none of all the Greeks should blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I give way to Hector, whom a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath sent against me. Yet could I but hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voice of mighty Ajax, we would both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return, and even against a god renew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The combat, that we haply might restore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus to Achilles, Peleus’ son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such in this choice of evils were the least.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he mused, the men of Troy came on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Hector at their head. The Greek gave way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left the slain. As when a lion, driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pikes and clamor from the herdsman’s stalls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By men and dogs, unwillingly retreats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His valiant heart still raging in his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So did the fair-haired Menelaus leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus. When he reached the Grecian ranks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned and stood and looked about to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty Ajax, son of Telamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And him he soon beheld on the left edge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of battle, rallying there and heartening</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His men; for Phoebus from above had sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A panic fear among them. To him then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Atreus went in haste and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ajax, my friend, come hither where we fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around Patroclus. Let us strive at least</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring Achilles back the hero’s corpse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though stripped; for crested Hector hath his arms.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the courage of the warlike son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Telamon was kindled by his words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the front rank he hastened, and with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went fair-haired Menelaus. Hector there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had spoiled Patroclus of his glorious arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now was dragging him apart to hew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The head away with his keen sword, and give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The body to the dogs of Troy. Just then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came Ajax, bearing, like a tower, his shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hector mingled with the Trojan ranks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaped into his car; but first he gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friends the glittering spoil to bear away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Troy⁠—a glory to the conqueror;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Ajax, over Menoetiades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding his ample shield, stood firm as stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lion o’er his whelps, when, as he comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading them through the wood, the hunters rush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon him, and his look is terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As his knit eyebrows cover his fierce eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Ajax moved around the hero’s corpse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While warlike Menelaus by his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Atreus, stood in bitter grief.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then with a look of anger, Glaucus spake⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Hippolochus, and chief among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lycians⁠—thus to Hector: “Though thy form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector, be noble, yet in prowess thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art wanting, and thy fame in feats of war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not deserved, since thou dost fly the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think whether thou alone, with others born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Troy, canst save the city and the state.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For henceforth will no Lycian fight for Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the Greeks; this conflict without end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has never earned them thanks. Inglorious chief!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How wilt thou be the shield of humbler men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou canst leave Sarpedon, who has been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy comrade and thy guest, to be the prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spoil of the Greek warriors? While he lived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great was the aid he brought thy cause and thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now thou dost not seek to drive away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dogs from his neglected corpse. For this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If any of the Lycians heed my words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will go home, and imminent will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ruin of thy city. If that firm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And resolute valor lived in Trojan hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which they should cherish who in the defence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their own country bear the toils and face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dangers of the field, we might this hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drag off the slain Patroclus into Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And should we bear him from the thick of fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the great city of Priam, soon the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would let us ransom the rich armor worn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By our Sarpedon, and bring back his corpse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he lies slain who was the bosom friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the most valiant chieftain at the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greece and leader of her bravest men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou, when great-souled Ajax fixed his eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thee, didst not venture to remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fight with him; he is more brave than thou.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The crested Hector frowned and thus replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why, Glaucus, should a warrior such as thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Utter such violent words? My friend, I deemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou wert wise above all other men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fertile Lycia, but I now must blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy judgment when thou say’st I shrink to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty Ajax. I do neither dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle’s fury nor the rush of steeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all prevailing are the purposes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of aegis-bearing Jove, who makes the brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To flee, and takes from him the victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then again impels him to the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come then, my friend, stand by me; see if I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skulk this time from the conflict, as thou say’st,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or tame the courage of whatever Greek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bravest, who defends Patroclus slain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, shouting, cheered the Trojans on:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Trojans and Lycians and Dardanians, trained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat hand to hand, let it be seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My friends, that ye are men, and still retain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your ancient valor; while I buckle on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious armor of the illustrious son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus, taken from Patroclus slain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the crested Hector, and withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the fierce conflict, and with rapid steps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ertook his comrades as they bore away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Townward the glorious arms of Peleus’ son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There from that deadly strife apart he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And changed his coat of mail. He gave his own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his companions, to be carried thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sacred Ilium, and he buckled on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The immortal armor of Achilles, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus, which the gods of heaven bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his father, who in his old age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consigned them to Achilles; but the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was never in that armor to grow old.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when the Cloud-compeller Jove beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector apart, accoutred in the arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus’ godlike son, he shook his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to himself he said: “Unhappy man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death even now is near to thee, and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not in all thy thoughts. Thou puttest on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heavenly armor of the terrible chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before whom others tremble; thou hast slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friend, the brave and gentle, and hast stripped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do him shame, the armor from his limbs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet will I for the moment give to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh triumphs, since Andromache shall ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receive, when thou returnest from the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The armor of Pelides from thy hands.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The son of Saturn spake, and gave the nod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his dark brows. Well did that coat of mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suit Hector’s form. Meantime the god of war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all his fierceness entered Hector’s breast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh vigor filled and nerved his frame; he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the ranks of his renowned allies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shouts; that glittering armor made him seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The large-souled son of Peleus. To them all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake in turn, encouraging their hearts⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Mesthles, Glaucus, and Thersilochus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Medon, Deisenor, and Hippothoüs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asteropaeus, Phorcys, Chromius,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ennomus the Augur; these the chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exhorted to the fight with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear me, ye mighty throng of our allies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwellers of nations round us! Not to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our army vast in numbers did I send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To summon you, each from his native town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that your willing valor might defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wives and children of the sons of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the assailing Greeks. I therefore give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most freely of our substance in large gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And banquets, that ye all may be content;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now let some of you move boldly on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do or die, which is the chance of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him who from the field will drag and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slain Patroclus to the Trojan knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compelling Ajax to give way⁠—to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I yield up half the spoil; the other half</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I keep, and let his glory equal mine.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and all that mighty multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lifted lances threw themselves against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Grecian ranks. They hoped to bear away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead from Ajax, son of Telamon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, idle hope! that hero o’er the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took many a Trojan’s life. Then Ajax thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Menelaus, great in battle, spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friend, O Menelaus, reared by Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer now I hope our safe return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From battle. Not the greatest of my fears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is for Patroclus, whom the dogs of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And birds of prey full quickly will devour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for my life and thine. That cloud of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector, o’ershadows all, and over us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impends the doom of death. Yet let us call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our mighty men, if they perchance may hear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Menelaus, great in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obeyed his wish and shouted to the Greeks:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, the princes and the chiefs of Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who at the public feasts with Atreus’ sons⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Agamemnon and his brother chief⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drink wine⁠—who each command a host, and hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your honors and your state from Jove⁠—my eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot discern you in the thick of fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But some of you, who cannot bear to leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus to the dogs of Troy, draw near!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; Oilean Ajax, swift of foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard and came forward, hastening through the fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after him Idomeneus, who brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meriones, his armor-bearer, fierce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the man-slayer Mars. But who could tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The names of all the other Greeks that sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mingle in the strife? The Trojans made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first assault, and Hector led them on.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As at the mouth of some great river, swol’n</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By rains from Jove, the mighty ocean-wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meets it with roaring, and the cliffs around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rebellow, while the surges toss without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such a clamor came the Trojans on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While round Patroclus closed, with one accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks, protected by their brazen shields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er their shining helmets Saturn’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured darkness. For when Menoetiades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet lived, attendant upon Peleus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove looked on him with no unkind regard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he would not that his corse should feed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The enemy’s dogs, and therefore moved his friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rescue him. At first the Trojans drave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark-eyed Greeks before them; back they fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left the dead; yet, fiercely as they came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans slew no man, but dragged away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead. A moment, and no more, the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell back; for Ajax quickly rallied them⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ajax, who, next to Peleus’ valiant son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excelled them all in form and feats of war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He through the foremost warriors brake, as strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a wild bear that on the mountain’s side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breaks through the shrubs, and scatters with a bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A band of youths and dogs. The illustrious son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of honored Telamon thus put to rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan phalanxes environing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus, in the hope to bear him thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Townward with glory. There Hippothoüs, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lethus the Pelasgian, having bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thong about the sinewy ankle, toiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drag away the slain man by the foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that fierce strife⁠—a grateful spectacle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hector and the Trojans. Yet on him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vengeance which no friendly arm could ward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell suddenly. The son of Telamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed through the crowd, and in close combat smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His helmet’s brazen cheek. That plumèd helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was cleft by the huge spear and vigorous hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where the weapon struck Hippothoüs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingled with blood the brain gushed forth; the life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forsook his limbs; he dropped from nerveless hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foot of brave Patroclus, and beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corpse fell headlong⁠—far from the rich fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his Larissa, never to repay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gentle cares in their old age the love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his dear parents; for his life was short,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by the spear of Ajax, large of soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Hector aimed again his shining spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Ajax, who perceived it as it came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And just avoided it. The weapon struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Schedius, the valiant son of Iphitus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bravest of the Phocians, whose abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Panopeus the famous, where he ruled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er many men. Beneath the collar-bone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It pierced him, and passed through; the brazen point</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came out upon the shoulder; to the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell, his armor clashing with his fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Ajax smote the valiant Phorcys, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phoenops, in the navel. Through the mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brazen weapon broke, and roughly tore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The entrails. In the dust he fell, and clenched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth with dying hands. The foremost ranks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led by illustrious Hector, at the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yielded the ground; the Greeks with fearful shouts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dragged off the bodies of Hippothoüs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Phorcys, and despoiled them of their arms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then would the Trojans have been put to flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the warlike Greeks, and, craven like,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone up to Troy, and great had been the fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gained by the might and courage of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond what Jupiter designed to give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not Apollo brought Aeneas forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By putting on the form of Periphas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herald and the son of Epytus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in that office as a prudent friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And counsellor had served, till he grew old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father of Aeneas. In his shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus spake Apollo, son of Jupiter:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Aeneas, ye might even hold the towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lofty Ilium safe against a god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were ye to act as some whom I have seen⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Valiant, and confident in their own might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And multitude of dauntless followers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now Jove favors us and offers us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victory o’er the Greeks, and yet ye flee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In abject terror, and refuse to fight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; Aeneas, looking at him, knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The archer-god, and with a mighty voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called out to Hector: “Hector! Thou and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who lead the troops of Troy, and our allies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great shame it were if we were put to rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the warlike Greeks, and beaten back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Troy like cowards. Standing by my side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the gods already hath declared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Jupiter, All-wise, is our ally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle. Let us therefore boldly fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the Greeks, nor suffer them to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus unmolested to their fleet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and, springing to the foremost ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood firm; the Trojans also turned and faced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians. Then Aeneas with his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck down Leocritus, the gallant friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lycomedes and Arisbas’ son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warlike Lycomedes saw his fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With grief, and came and cast his shining spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Apisaon, son of Hippasus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shepherd of the people. Underneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The midriff, through the liver went the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he fell lifeless. He had come to Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From rich Pseonia, and was great in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next to Asteropaeus. As he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrade fall, Asteropaeus, moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By grief, advanced to combat with the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But could not; for the group that stood around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus showed a fence of shields, and held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their spears before them. Ajax moved among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warriors, charging them that none should leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corpse, and none should step beyond the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strike the foe, but stay to guard the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And combat hand to hand. Such was the charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mighty Ajax. All the earth around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was steeped with blood, and many a corpse was heaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On corpse of Trojans and their brave allies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the Greeks, for even on their side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strife was not unbloody, though of Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There perished fewer; each was on the watch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ward the battle’s dangers from the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then did they fight like fire. You could not say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun was safe, nor yet the moon, so thick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A darkness gathered over the brave men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the corpse of Menoetiades.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other Trojans and the well-armed Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fought freely under the clear sky; the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shed o’er them his full brightness; not a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shadowed the earth, or rested on the hills.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From time to time they paused, and warily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They shunned each other’s cruel darts, and kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from each other, while in the mid-war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struggled the combatants in darkness, galled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the remorseless weapons of their foes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet Thrasymedes and Antilochus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two famous Grecian warriors, had not learned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That excellent Patroclus was no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thought that, still alive, he led the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the Trojans, fighting in the van.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They watched the flight and slaughter of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fought apart, for Nestor so enjoined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sent them to the battle from the fleet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But they who held the middle space around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The friend of swift Aeacides, maintained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A desperate strife all day; the knees, the thighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The feet, the hands, the eyes of those who fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were faint with weariness and foul with sweat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when an ample ox-hide, steeped in fat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is given to workmen to be stretched, they stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around it in a circle, pulling it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till forth the moisture issues, and the oil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enters the skin, and by that constant strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From many hands the hide is duly stretched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in small space the warriors drew the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither and thither; they of Ilium strove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drag it to the city, they of Greece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear it to the fleet. The tumult then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was terrible, and neither Mars himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The musterer of hosts, nor Pallas, roused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her intensest wrath, had they been near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The struggle, would have seen it with disdain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such deadly strife of steeds and men was held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er slain Patroclus by the will of Jove.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The great Achilles knew not yet the fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his Patroclus, for the warriors fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the fleet, beside the wall of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He never thought of him as one whose death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was near, but trusted that, when once he reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan wall, he would return alive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ever deemed he that without his aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or even with it, would Patroclus sack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city. This was what he oft had heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Thetis, who disclosed to him apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The counsel of Almighty Jupiter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet had his mother never once revealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The present evil⁠—that the one whom most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loved of all his friends should perish thus.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still round the dead they fought with their keen spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slew each other. Then of the mailed Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Someone would say: “O friends, it were disgrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should we fall back upon our roomy ships.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First let the dark earth swallow us; for this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were better than to let the Trojan knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drag off the dead in triumph to their town.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And some among the large-souled sons of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would say: “O friends, though all of us should fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside this corpse, let no one turn and flee.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus they, encouraging each other, spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the fight went on. The iron din</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose through the waste air to the brazen heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime aloof from battle stood the steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus’ son, and sorrowed when they knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he who guided them lay stretched in dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Hector’s slaughtering hand. Automedon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave son of Diores, often tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lash, and gentle words as oft, and oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouted forth threats; yet neither would they move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward the broad Hellespont, where lay the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor toward the Greeks in combat, but remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Motionless as a funeral column, reared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mark a man’s or woman’s tomb. So stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coursers yoked to that magnificent car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With drooping heads, and tears that from their lids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowed hot, for sorrow at the loss of him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who was their charioteer, and their fair manes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeping the yoke below, were foul with dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Saturn saw their grief, and shook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head in pity, saying to himself:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why did the gods bestow you, luckless pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Peleus⁠—on a king of mortal birth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You who shall never feel old age or death?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was it that ye might share with human-kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sorrows? for the race of mortal men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all that breathe and move upon the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the most wretched. Yet of this be sure⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye shall never in that sumptuous car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear Hector. Is it not enough that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should wear that armor, uttering idle boasts?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now will I infuse into your limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit and strength, that ye may safely bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Automedon across the battle-field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the roomy galleys lie. I yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must give more glory to the men of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they must slay until they come again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the good ships of Greece⁠—until the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goes down and sacred darkness covers all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the god, and breathed into the steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New life and vigor. From their manes they shook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dust, and flew with that swift car among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks and Trojans. With the Trojan throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Automedon, though mourning his slain friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maintained the fight; he rushed upon their ranks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vulture pouncing on a flock of geese.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiftly he passed from out the Trojan throng;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiftly again he charged their phalanxes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fierce pursuit. Yet slew he none of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom he pursued; he could not guide at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The steeds and cast the spear, when seated thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone within that sacred car. At last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A friend, the valorous Alcimedon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laërces’ son, of Aemon’s line, beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His plight, and, standing near his chariot, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What god, Automedon, hath prompted thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To these mad acts, and stolen thy better sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fighting alone among the foremost ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trojan warriors, thy companion slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hector in the field, who boastfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stalks in the armor of Aeacides?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus Automedon, Diores’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made answer: “Who is there among the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Able like thee, Alcimedon, to rein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And curb the spirit of immortal steeds?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None were there save Patroclus while he lived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise as a god in council. Death and fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now hold him. To thy hand I give the lash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shining reins, while I descend and fight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and into his swift chariot sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcimedon, and took the lash and reins.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Automedon leaped down. As Hector saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thus bespake Aeneas at his side:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Aeneas, leader of the men of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Equipped in brazen armor, I have seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those coursers of the swift Aeacides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven through the battle by unwarlike hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’tis my hope, if thou wilt give thine aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seize them. They who guide them will not dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stand and face us when we make the charge.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; Anchises’ valiant son complied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, sheltered by their shields of tough ox-hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well dried and firm, and strong with plates of brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The twain went forward. With them at their side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went Chromius and Aretus, nobly formed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hope to lead away the high-necked steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their guardians slain. Vain dreamers! They were doomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not without bloody penance to return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that encounter with Automedon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who prayed to Father Jove, and whose faint heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was strengthened and made bold. And thus the chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said to his faithful friend Alcimedon:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Keep not the steeds thou guidest far from me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcimedon, but let them ever breathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon my shoulders. Hector, Priam’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think, will not give over this assault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before he either slays us, and ascends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The car to which these steeds with flowing manes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are yoked, and puts to flight the phalanxes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Argive warriors, or himself is slain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and called to both the Ajaxes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Menelaus: “Ye who lead the Greeks,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, and named the chieftains, “give in charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead to your best warriors, to surround</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And guard the corpse, and drive away the foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hasten to avert the evil day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From us who are alive. For even now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector comes rushing through the deadly fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brings Aeneas; these are the most brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the Trojan army. On the knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the great gods the issue rests. I too</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will cast the spear, and leave the rest to Jove.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and lifting his huge spear he smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The round shield of Aretus. There the blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stopped not, but, entering, pierced him through the belt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, when a vigorous youth with a keen axe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes a wild bull behind the horns, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Severs the sinews, forward leaps the beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And falls⁠—Aretus, springing forward thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell headlong. In the Trojan’s entrails still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quivered the spear, and life forsook his limbs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Hector aimed, to smite Automedon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shining spear. The Greek beheld and stooped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shunned the brazen weapon. Down it came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plunged into the earth, and stood, its stem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still shaken with the blow, and spent its force.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now would the twain have turned, and hand to hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fought with their swords, when suddenly came up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warriors Ajax, hastening, at the call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their companion, through the crowd, and stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The combat. Hector and Aeneas then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Chromius, of the godlike form, withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through caution, leaving on the battle-field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aretus lying mangled. The fierce chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Automedon despoiled the dead, and spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boastfully: “Somewhat lighter on my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies now my grief for Menoetiades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I have slain a man of meaner note.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he spake, he threw the bloody spoils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his chariot, mounting to the seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His feet and hands all crimson with the blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a lion has devoured an ox.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then round Patroclus raged the strife again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murderous and sad to see; for Pallas there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inflamed the strife, sent down from heaven by Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rouse the courage of the Greeks, since such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was now his will. As when the god displays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To men a purple rainbow in the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sign of war or of a bitter storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which drives the laborer from his task, and makes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cattle droop, so, in a purple cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concealed, she went among the Greeks, and filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hearts with valor. Taking first the form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phoenix, and his clear, unwearied voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She spake in stirring words to Atreus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gallant Menelaus, standing near:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shame and dishonor will it be to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Menelaus, if, beneath the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy, the hungry dogs should tear the corpse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him who was in life the faithful friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of great Achilles. Fight thou therefore on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bravely, and bid the other Greeks be brave.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Menelaus, great in war, rejoined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Phoenix, aged father, who wert born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In days long past, would but Minerva give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The needed strength, and ward from me the stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of weapons, then would I stand by and guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus, for his death hath filled my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With grief. But Hector’s rage is like the rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fire; he ceases not to slay; for Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives to his spear the glory of the day.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and well was blue-eyed Pallas pleased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That first to her of all the deities</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He prayed; and therefore did she nerve his chest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knees with strength, and put into his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daring of the fly, that, often driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From man, returns and bites, and finds how sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is human blood. Such resolute zeal she woke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his stern soul, as quickly he approached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus, and sent forth his shining spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Trojans was Eëtion’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Podes, the rich and brave, whom Hector held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In highest honor, choosing him to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Companion of his feasts. Him in the waist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-haired Menelaus, as he fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote, driving home the weapon. With a clash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell to earth, and Menelaus drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slain away among the Grecian ranks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came Apollo, putting on the form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phaenops, son of Asius, whose abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was in Abydos, and whom Hector most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Esteemed of all his guests. The archer-god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew near to Hector, and bespake him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hector, what other Greek will fear thee now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou dost shrink from Menelaus, deemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Effeminate in war? Behold, he drags</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away a warrior from thy host; his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath slain thy faithful friend, Eëtion’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave Podes, fighting in the foremost ranks.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: a cloud of sorrow overspread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul of Hector. Armed in glittering brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went among the warriors in the van.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did the son of Saturn lift on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fringèd aegis, gleaming; with a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He covered Ida, sent his lightnings down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thundered terribly, and made the mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shake to its base, and gave the victory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Troy, and put to rout the Grecian host.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Peneleus of Bueotia led the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spear that lighted on the shoulder-tip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he came forward, wounded him. The blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurled by Polydamas in close assault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entered and grazed the bone. Then Hector pierced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wrist of Leitus, Alectryon’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made him leave the combat. As he fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked around in fear, nor hoped again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wield the spear against the men of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Hector followed Leitus, he met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long spear of Idomeneus, which struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His corselet near the pap; the weapon broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheer at the socket, and the Trojans raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shout, while Hector at Idomeneus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let fly his spear. It missed the chief, but smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coeranus, who from pleasant Lyctus came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The friend and follower of Meriones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For on that day Idomeneus had come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his good ships on foot, and great had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The triumph of the Trojans at his fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Coeranus had not with his swift steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed near and bid him mount. ’Twas thus he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To save Idomeneus from death, and yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the man-queller Hector his own life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The javelin entered underneath the ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the jaw-bone, where, forcing out the teeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It cleft the tongue in twain. He fell to earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dropped the reins. Meriones stooped down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took them from the dust in his own hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus bespake Idomeneus: “Ply well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lash, until thy coursers reach the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou mayst clearly see that victory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Today is not upon the Grecian side.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: Idomeneus, fear-smitten, lashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long-maned steeds that hurried toward the fleet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor now did Menelaus nor his friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The valiant Ajax, fail to see that Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had changed the vantage to the side of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the son of Telamon began:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alas! The feeblest mind can now perceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Father Jove is with the sons of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gives to them the glory of the day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their weapons smite, whoever sends them forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coward or brave, for Jove directs them all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ours fall to earth in vain. But let us now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consult how best to bear the corpse away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how, returning, we may meet our friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With joy; for they are grieved as they behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our plight, and fear that we may not withstand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fiery onset and invincible arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the man-queller Hector. Would there were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some comrade who would bear to Peleus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tidings of the day! For he, I think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has not yet heard that his dear friend is slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None such can I behold of all the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they are shrouded all⁠—their steeds and they⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In darkness. Father Jove, deliver us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From darkness; clear the heavens and give our eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again to see. Destroy us if thou wilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But O destroy us in the light of day!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: the All-Father saw him shedding tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pitied him, and bade the shadows flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swept away the cloud. The sun looked forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the battle lay in light. Then thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To warlike Menelaus Ajax said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Menelaus, foster-child of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look round and see if yet Antilochus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The large-souled son of Nestor, is alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bid him bear the tidings in all haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the great son of Peleus, that the one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all his friends whom most he loved is slain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Menelaus, great in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Complied, and hastened forth, as from a fold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lion stalks away, that long has kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fear the hounds and herdsmen, who all night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have watched to drive him from their well-fed beeves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, eager for his prey, he rushes oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against them, but in vain, for many a spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is hurled at him, and many a blazing brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, fierce for ravin as he is, he dreads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till sullenly at early morn he goes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So from Patroclus went unwillingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The valiant Menelaus, for he feared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest, panic-struck, the Greeks should leave his corpse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The enemy’s prey. Thus earnestly he prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warriors Ajax and Meriones:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye warriors Ajax, leaders of the Greeks!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, Meriones! Let each of you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear well in mind how kindly was the mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of poor Patroclus; gentle in his life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was he to all, and now is with the dead.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-haired Menelaus, speaking thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withdrew. He looked around him as he went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As looks an eagle, bird of sharpest sight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So men declare⁠—of all the fowls of air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which, though high in heaven, the nimble hare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the thicket is not hid; he stoops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And takes the creature’s life. Thy piercing eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Menelaus, thus on every side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were turned, in eager scrutiny, to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the multitude of Greeks the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Nestor living. Him he soon descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the battle’s left, where manfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cheered his fellows on. The fair-haired son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus came and stood by him, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stay, foster-child of Jove, Antilochus!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And listen to the sorrowful news I bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what should ne’er have been. Thou must have well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perceived, I think, that some divinity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth heap disaster on our host, and give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victory to the Trojans. He is dead⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patroclus⁠—the most valiant of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And great their sorrow is. Now hasten thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Greek galleys; let Achilles know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tidings; he may haply bring the corpse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stripped as it is, unmangled to the fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For crested Hector has the arms he wore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and at his words Antilochus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was horror-struck; in grief too great for speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tears filled his eyes, and his clear voice was choked.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet heeded he the mandate. Laying off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arms, he gave them to his blameless friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laodocus, who with his firm-paced steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came toward him. Thus prepared he ran; his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried him swiftly from the battle-field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear the evil news to Peleus’ son.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet Menelaus, foster-child of Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy spirit did not prompt thee to remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aid thy hard-pressed comrades at the spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence thou didst send Antilochus, and where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Pyleans longed to keep him. Yet he sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble Thrasymedes to their aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he returned to where Patroclus lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stood beside the warriors there, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I sent to swift Achilles at the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A messenger, yet think he will not come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though royal Hector’s deed hath roused his rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unarmed he cannot meet the sons of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consult we then how we may best convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The body to the ships, and how ourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escape the doom of death by Trojan hands.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The mighty Ajax, son of Telamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replied: “O Menelaus far-renowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well hast thou spoken. Lift thou now the corse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou and Meriones, and place yourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath it, and convey it from the field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We, following you, will combat with the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy and noble Hector⁠—we who, named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alike and one in spirit, oft have borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fury of the battle side by side.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ended, and the warriors in their arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised with main strength the body from the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans, as they saw it borne away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouted behind them, rushing on like hounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That spring upon a wounded forest-boar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the hunter-youths now pressing close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his flank, to tear him, then again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whene’er he turns upon them in his strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retreating in dismay, and put to flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither and thither. Thus, in hot pursuit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And close array, the Trojans following strook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With swords and two-edged spears; but when the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned and stood firm to meet them, every cheek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew pale, and not a single Trojan dared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw near the Greeks to combat for the corse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus rapidly they bore away the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward their good galleys from the battle-field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward with them the furious battle swept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As spreads a fire that, kindled suddenly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seizes a city, and the dwellings sink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the consuming blaze, and a strong wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roars through the flame. Such fearful din of steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And warriors followed the retreating Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from a mountain summit strong-backed mules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drag over the rough ways a ponderous beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or mast, till weary with the mighty strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And streaming sweat, so they with resolute toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore off the dead. Behind them as they went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their two defenders kept the foe aloof.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a river-dike o’ergrown with trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crosses a plain, and holds the violent course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the swol’n stream in check, and, driving back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waters, spreads them o’er the level fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor can their fury force a passage through⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So did the warriors Ajax hold in check</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans; yet they followed close, and two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More closely than the rest⁠—Aeneas, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of old Anchises, and the illustrious chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector. As when a company of daws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or starlings, startled at a hawk’s approach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murderous enemy of the smaller birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take wing with piercing cries, so, driven before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The might of Hector and Aeneas, fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks with clamorous cries, and thought no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of combat. In the trench and near it lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many fair weapons, which the fugitive Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had dropped in haste, and still the war went on.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
