<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 2: The Trial of the Army, and Catalogue of the Forces</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Trial of the Army, and Catalogue of the Forces</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">A treacherous dream sent by Jupiter to Agamemnon, who assembles the army in the hope to take Troy⁠—Debate of the chiefs in council⁠—Agamemnon pretends a desire to return to Greece, in order to try the disposition of the army⁠—Insolent speech of Thersites, and his punishment by Ulysses⁠—Advice of Nestor to review the troops⁠—Catalogue of the troops and ships⁠—Enumeration of the Trojan forces.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>All other deities, all mortal men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tamers of war-steeds, slept the whole night through;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But no sweet slumber came to Jove; his thoughts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were ever busy with the anxious care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To crown with honor Peleus’ son, and cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myriads to perish at the Grecian fleet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last, this counsel seemed the best⁠—to send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A treacherous dream to Agamemnon, son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Atreus. Then he called a Dream, and thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Addressing it with wingèd words, he said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Go, fatal Vision, to the Grecian fleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, entering Agamemnon’s tent, declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faithfully what I bid thee. Give command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now he arm, with all the array of war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The long-haired Greeks, for lo, the hour is come is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That gives into his hands the city of Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all its spacious streets. The powers who dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the celestial mansions are no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At variance; Juno’s prayers have moved them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er the Trojans hangs a fearful doom.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake the God; the Vision heard, and went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once to where the Grecian barks were moored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And entered Agamemnon’s tent and found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The king reposing, with the balm of sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poured all around him. At his head the Dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took station in the form of Neleus’ son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nestor, whom Agamemnon honored most</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the aged men. In such a shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heaven-sent Dream to Agamemnon spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O warrior-son of Atreus, sleepest thou?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tamer of steeds! It ill becomes a chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who has the charge of nations and sustains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such mighty cares, to sleep the livelong night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give earnest heed to me, for I am come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A messenger from Jove, who, though far off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takes part in thy concerns and pities thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bids thee arm, with all the array of war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The long-haired Greeks, for now the hour is come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which gives into thy hands the city of Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all its spacious streets. The powers that dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the celestial mansions are no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At variance; Juno’s prayers have moved them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er the Trojans hangs a fearful doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Decreed by Jove. Bear what I say in mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when thy sleep departs forget it not.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and, disappearing, left the king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Musing on things that never were to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For on that very day he thought to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The city of Priam. Fool! who little knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What Jupiter designed should come to pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And little thought by his own act to bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great woe and grief on Greeks and Trojans both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hard-fought battles. From his sleep he woke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heavenly voice still sounding in his ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sat upright, and put his tunic on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft, fair, and new, and over that he cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ample cloak, and round his shapely feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laced the becoming sandals. Next, he hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his shoulders and his side the sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With silver studs, and took into his hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ancestral sceptre, old, but undecayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with it turned his footsteps toward the fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Achaian warriors brazen-mailed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Dawn, the goddess, climbed the Olympian height,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Foretelling Day to Jupiter and all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The immortal gods, when Agamemnon bade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shrill-voiced heralds call the long-haired Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together; they proclaimed his will, and straight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warriors came in throngs. But first he bade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A council of large-minded elders meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Pylian Nestor’s royal bark, and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laid his well-pondered thought before them:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My friends, give ear: a Vision from above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came to me sleeping in the balmy night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most like to noble Nestor was its look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its face, its stature, and its garb. It stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside me at my head, and thus it spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O warrior-son of Atreus, sleepest thou?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tamer of steeds! It ill becomes a chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who has the charge of nations and sustains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such mighty cares, to sleep the livelong night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give earnest heed to me, for I am come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A messenger from Jove, who, though far off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takes part in thy concerns and pities thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bids thee arm, with all the array of war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The long-haired Greeks, for now the hour is come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which gives into thy hands the city of Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all its spacious streets. The powers who dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the celestial mansions are no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At variance; Juno’s prayers have moved them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er the Trojans hangs a fearful doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Decreed by Jove. Bear what I say in mind.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“It spake and passed away, and with it fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My slumbers. Now must we devise a way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bring into the field the sons of Greece.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I first will try, as best I may, with words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And counsel flight from Troy with all our ships.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye each, with different counsels, do your part.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and took his seat, and after him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nestor, the king of sandy Pylus, rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With well-considered words. “O friends,” he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Leaders and princes of the Grecian race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had any other of the Argive host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Related such a dream, we should have said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tale is false, and spurned the counsel given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he has seen it who in rank and power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transcends us all, and ours it is to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How we may arm for war the sons of Greece.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and left the council, and the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All sceptred kings, arose, prepared to obey no</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shepherd of the people. All the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile came thronging to the appointed place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, swarming forth from cells within the rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coming and coming still, the tribe of bees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fly in a cluster o’er the flowers of spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some are darting out to right and left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from the ships and tents a multitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the spacious beach, in mighty throngs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moved toward the assembly. Rumor went with them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The messenger of Jove, and urged them on.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now, when they were met, the place was stunned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With clamor; earth, as the great crowd sat down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groaned under them; a din of mingled cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arose; nine shouting heralds strove to hush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The noisy crowd to silence, that at length</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heaven-descended monarchs might be heard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And when the crowd was seated and had paused</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From clamor, Agamemnon rose. He held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sceptre; Vulcan’s skill had fashioned it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Vulcan gave it to Saturnian Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Jove bestowed it on his messenger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Argus-queller Hermes. He in turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave it to Pelops, great in horsemanship;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Pelops passed the gift to Atreus next,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The people’s shepherd. Atreus, when he died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bequeathed it to Thyestes, rich in flocks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And last, Thyestes left it to be borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Agamemnon, symbol of his rule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er many isles and all the Argive realm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaning on this, he spake these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Friends, Grecian heroes, ministers of Mars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saturnian Jove hath in an evil net</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entangled me most cruelly. He gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His promise and his nod, that, having razed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Troy with her strong defences, I should see us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My home again; but now he meditates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wrong me, and commands me to return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lessened glory and much people lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Argos. Thus hath it seemed good to Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty, who hath overthrown the towers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of many a city, and will yet o’erthrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ages yet to come will hear with shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That such a mighty army of the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have waged a fruitless war, and fought in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A foe less numerous; yet no end appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To this long strife. Should Greeks and Trojans make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A treaty, faithfully to number each,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And should the Trojans count their citizens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we the Greeks, disposed in rows of tens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should call the Trojans singly to pour out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wine for us, full many a company</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ten would lack its cup-bearer; so far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I judge, the sons of Greece outnumber those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dwell in Troy. But they have yet allies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From many a city, men who wield the spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withstanding my attempt to overthrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That populous town. Nine years of mighty Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have passed already, and the planks that form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our barks are mouldering, and the cables drop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pieces, and our wives within their homes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With their young children, sit expecting us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet is the enterprise for which we came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still unperformed. Now let us all obey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mandate I reveal, and hasten hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all our fleet, to our beloved homes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Troy with her broad streets we cannot take.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and in the bosoms of the crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stirred every heart; even those who heard him not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were moved: the assembly wavered to and fro</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the long billows of the Icarian Sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roused by the East wind and the South, that rush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth from the cloudy seat of Father Jove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like the harvest-field, when west winds stoop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suddenly from above, and toss the wheat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was the whole assembly swayed; they ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tumult to the ships; beneath their feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose clouds of dust, and each exhorted each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seize the ships and drag them to the deep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They cleared the channels mid the clamorous cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of multitudes, who hastened to return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drew the props from underneath their barks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then had the Greeks returned before their time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Juno had not to Minerva said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Unconquerable child of Jove! What change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is this? Shall then the Argive army thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flee to their homes across the deep and leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glory to Priam, and to Ilium’s sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Argive Helen, for whose sake have died</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many Greeks upon the Trojan strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the land they loved? But hasten thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the host of Argive warriors mailed in brass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with persuasive words restrain their men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor let them launch their barks upon the sea.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She spake; nor did the blue-eyed Pallas fail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To heed the mandate, but with quick descent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She left the Olympian height and suddenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood by the swift ships of the Grecian host.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She found Ulysses there, the man endowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wisdom like to Jove’s; he had not touched</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His well-appointed bark, for grief had seized</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hero’s heart. The blue-eyed goddess took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her place beside him, and addressed him thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Son of Laertes, nobly born and sage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ulysses, will ye, entering your good ships,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Return in flight to your own land and leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glory to Priam, and to Ilium’s sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Argive Helen, for whose sake have died</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many Greeks upon the Trojan strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the land they loved? Go thou at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seek the Argive warriors and restrain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thy persuasive words the impatient men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor let them launch their well-appointed ships.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She spake; Ulysses knew the heavenly voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hastened back, and as he ran cast by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cloak. Eurybates of Ithaca,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The herald, caught it as he followed him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now before Atrides, king of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warrior stood, and from his hand received</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ancestral sceptre, old, but undecayed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bearing this, he went among the ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which brought the Achaian army, mailed in brass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whomsoe’er he met upon his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Monarch or eminent among the host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stopped him, and addressed him blancily, thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Good friend, this eager haste as if from fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Befits thee not. Sit down, and cause the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sit. Whit Agamemnon’s will may be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou canst not yet be certain; he intends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To try the Greeks, and soon will punish those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who act amiss. We cannot all have heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What he has said; beware, then, lest his wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall heavily upon the sons of Greece.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monarch, foster-child of Jupiter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is terrible enraged. Authority</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is given by Jove, all-wise, who loves the king.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when he found one of the lower sort</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouting and brawling, with the royal wand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He smote him, and reproved him sharply, thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Friend, take thy seat in quiet, and attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what thy betters say; thou art iot strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor valiant, and thou art of ro^.an repute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In combat and in council. We, the Greeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cannot be all supreme in power. The rule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the many is not well. One must be chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In war, and one the king, to whom the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Saturn gives the sceptre, making him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lawgiver, that he may rule the rest.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus did he act the chief, and make the host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obey his word; they to the council ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came rushing back from all the ships and tents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tumult, as, on the long-stretching shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ocean many-voiced, his billows fling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Themselves in fury, and the deep resounds.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All others took their seats and kept their place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thersites only, clamorous of tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept brawling. He, with many insolent words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was wont to seek unseemly strife with kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uttering whate’er it seemed to him might move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Greeks to laughter. Of the multitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who came to Ilium, none so base as he⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Squint-eyed, with one lame foot, and on his back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lump, and shoulders curving towards the chest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head was sharp, and over it the hairs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were thinly scattered. Hateful to the chiefs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles and Ulysses, he would oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revile them. He to Agamemnon now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Called with shrill voice and taunting words. The Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heard him impatiently, with strong disgust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And vehement anger, yet he shouted stiil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Agamemnon, and kept railing on:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Of what dost thou complain; what wouldst thou more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Atrides? In thy tents are heaps of gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy tents are full of chosen damsels, given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee before all others, by the Greeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whene’er we take a city. Dost thou yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hanker for gold, brought by some Trojan knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A ransom for his son, whom I shall lead⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, or some other Greek⁠—a captive bound?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or dost thou wish, for thy more idle hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some maiden, whom thou mayst detain apart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ill it beseems a prince like thee to lead The sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of Greece, for such a cause as this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into new perils. O ye coward race!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye abject Greeklings, Greeks no longer, haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Homeward with all the fleet, and let us leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This man at Troy to win his trophies here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he may learn whether the aid we give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Avails him aught or not, since he insults</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles, a far braver man than he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And takes from him by force and holds his prize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet, Achilles is not moved by this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To anger: he is spiritless, or else,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Atrides, this injustice were thy last.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Taunting the shepherd of the people thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thersites shouted to the king of men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But great Ulysses, coming quickly up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rebuked him with a frown: “Thou garrulous wretch!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glib as thou art of tongue, Thersites, cease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor singly dare to seek dispute with kings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came, I deem, no viler wretch than thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Troy with Agamemnon. Prate no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of kings, reviling them, and keeping watch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For pretexts to return. We know not yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether to go or to remain were best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou railest at the shepherd of the host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Atrides Agamemnon, for thou seest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Grecian heroes load him with rewards,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While thou insultest him with scurrilous words.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I tell thee now⁠—and I shall keep my word⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If e’er again I find thee railing on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As now thou dost, then let Ulysses wear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head no longer, let me not be called</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The father of Telemachus, if I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall fail to seize thee, and to strip thee bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of cloak and tunic, and whatever else</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Covers thy carcass, and to send thee forth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Howling, to our swift barks upon the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scourged from the council with a storm of blows.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and with his sceptre smote the back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shoulders of the scoffer, who crouched low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shed a shower of tears. A bloody whelk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose where the golden sceptre fell. He took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His seat, dismayed, and still in pain wiped off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tears from his smutched face. The multitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around him, though in anxious mood, were moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To smiles, and one addressed his neighbor thus:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Strange that Ulysses does a thousand things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So well⁠—so wise in council, and in war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So brave; and for the Grecian army now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He does the best of all, in silencing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chatter of this saucy slanderer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose acrid temper will not soon again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Move him to rail with insolent speech at kings.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So talked the multitude. Ulysses then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holding the sceptre, rose, and by his side us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blue-eyed Pallas, iu a herald’s form,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commanded silence, that the Argive host⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mightiest and the meanest⁠—might attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what should now be said, and calmly weigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The counsel given them. With a prudent art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ulysses framed his speech, and thus he spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The Greeks, O Atreus’ son, would bring on thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dishonor in the eyes and speech of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breaking the promise made when first they came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Argos, famed for steeds, that, having spoiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This well-defended Troy, thou shouldst return</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A conqueror. And now, like tender boys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or widowed women, all give way to grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And languish to return. ’T were hard to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If, after all our sufferings and our toils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We go back now. And yet, whoe’er remains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A single month away from wife and home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chafes if the winter storms and angry sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Detain him stili on board his well-oared bark;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we have seen the ninth full year roll round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since we came hither. Therefore blame I not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Greeks if they in their beaked ships repine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this delay. But then it were disgrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To linger here so long and journey home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With empty hands. Bear with us yet, and wait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it be certain whether Calchas speaks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truly or not. For we remember well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all of you whom cruel death has spared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are witnesses with me, that when the ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Greece⁠—it seems as if but yesterday⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mustered in Aulis on their way to bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woe upon Priam and the town of Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we, beside a fountain, offered up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On sacred altars chosen hecatombs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under a shapely plane-tree, from whose root</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flowed the clear water, there appeared to us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wondrous sign. A frightful serpent, marked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With crimson spots, which Jupiter sent forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To daylight from beneath the altar-stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came swiftly gliding toward the tree, whereon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sparrow had her young⁠—eight unfledged birds⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the topmost bough and screened by leaves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mother was the ninth. The serpent seized</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The helpless brood and midst their piteous cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devoured them, while the mother fluttered round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lamenting, till he caught her by the wing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he had destroyed the parent bird</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all her brood, the god who sent him forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made him a greater marvel still. The son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of crafty Saturn changed the snake to stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we who stood around were sore amazed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was the awful portent which the gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showed at that sacrifice. But Calchas thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instantly spake, interpreting the sign:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“ ‘O long haired Greeks,’ he said, ‘why stand ye thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In silence? All-foreseeing Jupiter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath sent this mighty omen; late it comes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And late will be fulfilled, yet gloriously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a fame that never shall decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as the snake devoured the sparrow’s brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eight nestlings, and the mother-bird the ninth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many years the war shall last; the tenth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall give into our hands the stately Troy.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So spake the seer; thus far his words are true.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bide ye then here, ye well-greaved sons of Greece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the city of Priam shall be ours.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and loud applause thereon ensued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all the Greeks, and fearfully the ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rang with the clamorous voices uttering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The praises of Ulysses and his words.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Nestor, the Gerenian knight, arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus addressed them: “Strangely ye behave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like boys unwonted to the tasks of war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where now are all your promises and oaths?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall all our councillings and all our cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leagues made with wine, religiously outpoured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plightings of the strong right hand, be cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the flames? Idly we keep alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A strife of words, which serv es no end though long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We loiter here! But thou, Atrides, firm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of purpose, give command that now the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Move to the war, and leave to meet their fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those⁠—one or more⁠—who, parting from our host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meditate⁠—but I deem in vain⁠—to flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Homeward to Argos ere they are assured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether the word of Jove omnipotent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be false or true. For when the Greeks embarked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In their swift ships, to carry death and fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Ilium’s sons, almighty Jupiter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flung down his lightnings on the right and gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Propitious omens. Therefore let no Greek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go home till he possess a Trojan wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ye have signally avenged the wrongs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And griefs of Helen. Yet, if one be here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who longs to go, let him but lay his hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On his black ship, prepared to cross the deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he shall die before the rest. But thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O king, be wisely counselled, lend an ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To others, nor neglect what I propose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marshal the Greeks by tribes and brotherhoods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tribe may stand by tribe, and brotherhoods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Succor each other; if thou thus command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they obey, thou shalt discern which chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or soldier is faint-hearted, which is brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For each will fight his best, and thou shalt know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether through favor of the gods to Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or our own cowardice and shameful lack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of skill in war, the town is not o’erthrown.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In turn the monarch Agamemnon spake:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O aged warrior, thou excellest all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Greeks in council. Would to Jupiter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Pallas and Apollo, that with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There were but ten such comrades. Priam’s town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would quickly fall before us and be made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A desolation. But the god who bears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The aegis, Saturn’s son, hath cast on me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much grief, entangling me in idle strifes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And angry broils. Achilles and myself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have quarrelled for a maid with bitter words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I was first incensed. But if again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We meet and act as friends, the overthrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That threatens Ilium will not be delayed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for an hour. Now all to your repast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then prepare for battle. First let each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See that his spear be sharp, and put his shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In order, give to his swift-footed steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ample forage, and o’erlook his car</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it be strong for war; for all the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall we maintain the stubborn fight, nor cease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even for a moment, till the night come down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To part the wrathful combatants. The band</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of each broad buckler shall be moist with sweat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On every breast, and weary every arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wields the spear, and every horse that drags</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The polished chariot o’er the field shall smoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sweat. But whosoever shall be found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the beaked ships and skulking from the fray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be the feast of birds of prey and dogs!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake; the Argives raised a mighty shout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud as when billows lash the beetling shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rolled by the south-wind toward some jutting rock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which the waves, whatever wind may blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beat ceaselessly. In haste the people rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went among the ships, and kindled fires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within their tents and took their meal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one Made offerings to one god; another paid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vows to another of the immortal race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all implored deliverance from death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And danger. Agamemnon, king of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Offered a fatted ox of five years old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Jupiter Almighty, summoning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The elder princes of the Grecian host⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nestor the first, the king Idomeneus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the warriors Ajax and the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Tydeus, with Ulysses, like to Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In council, sixth and last. Unbidden came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The valiant Menelaus, for he knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cares that weighed upon his brother’s heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, as they stood around the fatted ox</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And took in hand the salted barley-meal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>King Agamemnon in the circle prayed:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O Jove, most great and glorious! who dost rule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tempest⁠—dweller of the ethereal space!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let not the sun go down and night come on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere I shall lay the halls of Priam waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fire, and give their portals to the flames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hew away the coat of mail that shields</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breast of Hector, splitting it with steel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And may his fellow-warriors, many a one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall round him to the earth and bite the dust.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake; the son of Saturn hearkened not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But took the sacrifice and made more hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The toils of war. And now when they had prayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strown the salted meal, they drew the neck</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the victim back and cufthe throat and flayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The carcass, hewed away the thighs and laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fat upon them in a double fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which they placed raw strips of flesh, and these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They burned with leafless billets. Then they fixed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The entrails on the spits and held them forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the flames, and when the thighs were burned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And entrails tasted, all the rest was carved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into small portions and transfixed with spits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And roasted carefully and drawn away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when these tasks were finished and the board</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was spread, they feasted; from that equal feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None went unsated. When they had appeased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their thirst and hunger, the Gerenian knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nestor stood forth and spake: “Most glorious son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waste we no time in prattle, nor delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The work appointed by the gods, but send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heralds of the Achaians, brazen-mailed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To call the people to the fleet, while we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass in a body through their vast array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wake the martial spirit in their breasts.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and Agamemnon, king of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Followed the counsel. Instantly he bade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The loud-voiced herald summon to the war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The long-haired Argives. At the call they came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quickly they came together, and the kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nurslings of Jupiter, who stood beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Atrides, hastened through the crowd to form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The army into ranks. Among them walked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blue-eyed Pallas, bearing on her arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The priceless aegis, ever fair and new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And undecaying; from its edge there hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hundred golden fringes, fairly wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every fringe might buy a hecatomb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With this and fierce, defiant looks she passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all the Achaian host, and made their hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impatient for the march and strong to endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The combat without pause⁠—for now the war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seemed to them dearer than the wished return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In their good galleys, to the land they loved.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a forest on the mountain-top</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is in a blaze with the devouring flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shines afar, so, while the warriors marched,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brightness of their burnished weapons flashed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On every side and upward to the sky.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And as when water-fowl of many tribes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Geese, cranes, and long-necked swans⁠—disport themselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Asia’s fields beside Cayster’s streams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to and fro they fly with screams, and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flock after flock, and all the fields resound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So poured, from ships and tents, the swarmmg tribes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into Scamander’s plain, where fearful’y</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth echoed to the tramp of steeds and men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there they mustered on the river’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Numberless as the flowers and leaves of spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as when flies in swarming myriads haunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The herdsman’s stalls in spring-time, when new milk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has filled the pails⁠—in such vast multitudes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mustered the long-haired Greeks upon the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impatient to destroy the Trojan race.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, as the goatherds, when their mingled flocks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are in the pastures, know and set apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each his own scattered charge, so did the chiefs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moving among them, marshal each his men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There walked King Agamemnon, like to Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In eye and forehead, with the loins of Mars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ample chest like him who rules the sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a bull amid the horned herd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stands eminent and nobler than the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Jove to Agamemnon on that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave to surpass the chiefs in port and mien.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Muses, goddesses who dwell on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me⁠—for all things ye behold and know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While we know nothing and may only hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The random tales of rumor⁠—tell me who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were chiefs and princes of the Greeks; for I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should fail to number and to name them all⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had I ten tongues, ten throats, a voice unapt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To weary, uttered from a heart of brass⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless the Muses aided me. I now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will sing of the commanders and the ships.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Peneleus, Prothoenor, Leitus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Clonius, and Arcesilaus led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warriors of Boeotia, all who dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Hyria and in rocky Aulis, all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Schoenus and from Scolus and the hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Eteonus and Thespeia’s fields,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Graia and the Mycalesian plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All who from Herma and Ilesius came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Erythrae, and those who had their homes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Eleon, Hyla, and Ocalea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Peteona, and the stately streets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Medeon, Copae, Thisbè full of doves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those whose dwelling-place was Eutresis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Coronaea, and the grassy lawns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Haliartus, all the men who held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plataea, or in Glissa tilled the soil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or dwelt in Hypothebae nobly built,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in Onchestus with its temple-walls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sacred to Neptune, or inhabited</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arnè with fruitful vineyards, Midea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Nyssa the divine, and Anthedon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The distant⁠—fifty were their barks, and each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Held sixscore youths of the Boeotian race.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next, over those who came from Aspledon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from Orchomenus in Minyas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ascalaphus ruled with his brother chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ialmenus⁠—two sons of mighty Mars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These, in the halls of Actor, Azis’ son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Astyoche bore to the god of war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who met by stealth the bashful maid, as once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sought the upper palace-rooms. Their ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were thirty, ranged in order on the shore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Schedius and Epistrophus, two chiefs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Born to Iphitus, son of Naubolus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The large of soul, led the Phocean host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those who in Cyparissus had their homes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Panopè and Crissa the divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Daulis, or about Hyampolis</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anemoreia, and upon the banks Of broad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cephissus, and with them the race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who held Lilaea by Cephissus’ springs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With these came forty ships. Their leaders went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among them, ranging them in due array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And close to the Boeotians on the left.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ajax the swift of foot, Oileus’ son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was leader of the Locrians⁠—less in limb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stature than the other Ajax⁠—nay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much smaller than that son of Telamon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wearing a linen corselet; but to wield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spear he far excelled all other men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hellas and Achaia. Those who dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Cynus, Opus, Bessa, and the fields</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Scarpha and Calliarus and green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Augeia, Tarpha, and the meadows where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boagrius waters Thronium, followed him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With forty dark-hulled Locrian barks, that came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From coasts beyond Eubrea’s sacred isle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Euboeans breathing valor, they who held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chalcis, Eretria, and the vineyard slopes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Histiaea, and the lofty walls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Dium and Cerinthus by the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Styra, and Earystus; these obeyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Elphenor of the line of Mars, and son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the large-souled Chalcodon ruler o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Abantes. Him with loosely flowing locks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Abantes followed, swift of foot and fierce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In combat, and expert to break the mail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the enemies’ breasts with ashen spears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With forty dark-hulled barks they followed him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next they who came from Athens nobly built,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The city of Erechthe’us, great of soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Son of the teeming Earth, whom Pallas reared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That daughter of the Highest, and within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sumptuous temple placed him, where the sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Athens, with the circling year’s return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paid worship at her altars, bringmg bulls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lambs to lay upon them; these obeyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Menestheus, son of Peteus, whom no chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On earth could equal in the art to place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Squadrons of men and horse in due array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For battle. Nestor only sought to share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This praise, but Nestor was the elder chief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fifty dark galleys with Menestheus came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ajax had brought twelve ships from Salamis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And these he stationed near the Athenian host.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But they who dwelt in Argos, or within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strong-walled Tiryns, or Hermione</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Asine with their deep, sheltering bays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Troezenè and Eïonae, and hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Epidaurus planted o’er with vines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they who tilled -£igina and the coast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Mases⁠—Grecian warriors⁠—over these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brave Diomed bore sway, with Sthenelus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beloved son of far-famed Campaneus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, third in rule, Euryalus, who seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to a god, Mecisteus’ royal son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sprung from Talaus; yet the chief command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was given to Diomed, the great in war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fleet of eighty galleys came with them.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The dwellers of Mycenae nobly built,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Corinth famed for riches, and the town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of beautiful Cleonae, they who tilled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Orneia, Araethyrea’s pleasant land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Sicyon, where of yore Adrastus reigned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hyperesia and the airy heights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Gonoessa, and Pellene’s fields,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they who came from Aegium and the shores</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around it, and broad lands of Helicè⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These had a hundred barks, and over them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Atrides Agamemnon bore command;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with him came the largest train of troops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bravest. He was cased in gleaming mail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his heart gloried when he thought how high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stood among the heroes⁠—mightier far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In power, and leader of a mightier host.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then they who dwelt within the hollow vale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of queenly Lacedsemon, they who held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phare and Sparta, Messa full of doves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bryseiae, and Augeia’s rich domain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amyclae and the town of Helos, built</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close to the sea, and those who had their homes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Laäs and the fields of Oetylus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All these obeyed the brother of the king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The valiant Menelaus. Sixty ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They brought, but these he ranged apart from those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Agamemnon. Through the ranks he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, trusting in his valor, quickened theirs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For battle; for his heart within him burned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To avenge the wrongs of Helen and her tears.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the men who tilled the Pylean coast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sweet Arenè, Thrya at the fords</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Alpheus, and the stately palace homes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Aepy, or in Cyparissus dwelt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in Amphigeneia, Pteleum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Helos and Dorium, where the Muses once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Met, journeying from Oecalian Eurytus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Thracian Thamyris, and took from him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His power of voice. For he had made his boast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To overcome in song the daughters nine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Jove the Aegis-bearer. They in wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smote him with blindness, took the heavenly gift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of song away, and made his hand forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its cunning with the harp. All those were led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Nestor, the Gerenian knight, who came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To war on Troy with fourscore ships and ten.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Arcadians, dwelling by the lofty mount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cyllene, near the tomb of Epytus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warriors who combat hand to hand, and they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who tilled the fields of Pheneus and possessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Orchomenus with all its flocks, or dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Ripa and in Stratia, and the bleak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enispe, beaten with perpetual winds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in Tegea, and the lovely land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Mantinea, and in Stymphalus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in Parrhasia, came in sixty ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Troy, with Agapenor for their chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Son of Ancaeus. Every ship was thronged</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With warriors of Arcadia, for the king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of men, Atrides, gave them well-oared barks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cross the dark blue deep, since not to them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pertained the cares and labors of the sea.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then from Buprasium and the sacred coast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Elis, from Hyrmine and remote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myrsinus and the Olenian precipice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from Alisium came, with chieftains four,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warriors, ten swift galleys following</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each chieftain, crowded with Epean troops.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And part obeyed Amphimacus, the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Cteatus, and part with Thalpius came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son of Eurytus Actorides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And part with brave Diores, of the line</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Amarynceus. Last, Polyxenus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The godlike offspring of Agasthenes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose father was Augeias, led the rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They from Dulichium and the Echinades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those holy isles descried from Elis o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The waters, had for leader Megas, brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Mars⁠—the son of Phyleus, dearly loved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Jove. He left his father’s house in wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dwelt within Dulichium. With the troops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Megas came a fleet of forty ships.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ulysses led the Cephallenian men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dwelt in Ithaca, or whose abode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was leafy Neritus, and those who came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Crocyleia, and from /Egilips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The craggy, and Zacynthus, and the isle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Samos, and Epirus, and from all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bordering lands. O’er these Ulysses ruled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A chief like Jove in council, and with him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came twelve galleys with their scarlet prows.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then with the ^Etolians came Andraemon’s son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thoas, their leader. With him were the men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Pleuron and Pylcne, Olenus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Chalcis on the sea-coast and the rocks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Calydon; for now no more the sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of large-souled Oeneus were alive on earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor lived the chief himself, and in his tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Meleager of the golden hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus the /Etolian rule to Thoas came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fleet of fourscore galleys followed him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Idomeneus, expert to wield the spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commanded those of Crete, the men who dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Cnosus or Gortyna, strongly walled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lyctus, Miletus, and the glimmering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycastus, Phaestus, Rhytium’s populous town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the warrior train inhabiting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hundred towns of Crete. Idomeneus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty spearman, and Meriones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fierce as the god of war, commanded these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And came to Troy with eighty dark-ribbed barks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tlepolemus, a warrior of the stock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hercules, was leader of the troops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Rhodes, and brought nine vessels to the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Manned with the haughty Rhodians. These were ranged as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In threefold order: those of Lindus, those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dwell in white Camirus, lastly those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ialassa. These Tlepolemus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The valiant spearman, ruled. Astyoche</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bore him to mighty Hercules, who led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The maid from Ephyra, upon the banks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Selleis, to be his wife, what time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His valor had o’erthrown and made a spoil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of many a city full of noble youths.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tlepolemus, when in the palace-halls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He grew to manhood, slew an aged man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An uncle of his father, whom he loved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycimnius, of the line of Mars, and straight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rigged a fleet of ships and led on board</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A numerous host and fled across the sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For fearful were the threats of other sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grandsons of the mighty Hercules.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Rhodes they landed after wanderings long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many hardships. There they dwelt in tribes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three tribes⁠—and were beloved of Jupiter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ruler over gods and men, who poured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abundant riches on their new abode.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nireus with three good ships from Syma came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nireus, Aglaia’s son by Charopus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monarch⁠—Nireus who in comeliness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surpassed all Greeks that came to Ilium, save</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faultless son-of Peleus. Yet was he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwarlike and few people followed him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The dwellers of Nisyrus, Crapathus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Cos, the city of Eurypylus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Casus, and the Calydnian isles, obeyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phidippus and his brother Antiphus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sons of the monarch Thessalus, who sprang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Hercules. With thirty ships they came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But those who held Pelasgian Argos, those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dwelt in Alos, Trachys, Alope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phthia, and Hellas full of lovely dames⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Named Myrmidons, Achaians, Hellenes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles led their fifty ships; but they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now heeded not the summons to the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there was none to form their ranks for fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great Achilles, swift of foot, remained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within his ships, indignant for the sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the fair-haired Briscis, whom he brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A captive from Lyrnessus after toils</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dangers many. He had sacked and spoiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lyrnessus, and o’crthrown the walls of Thebes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And smitten Mynes and Epistrophus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warlike sons of King Evenus, sprung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From old Selapius. For this cause he kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within his ships, full soon to issue forth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The men of Phylacè, of Pyrasus⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sacred to Ceres and o’erspread with flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of Itona, mother of white flocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Antrona on the sea, and Pteleum green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With herbage⁠—over these while yet he lived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brave Protesilaüs ruled; but now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dark earth covered him, and for his sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His consort, desolate in Phylacè,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tore her fair cheeks, and all unfinished stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His palace, for a Dardan warrior slew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her husband as he leaped upon the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foremost of the Achaians. Yet his troops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were not without a leader, though they mourned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their brave old chief. Podarces, loved by Mars⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Son of Iphiclus, rich in flocks, who sprang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Phylacus⁠—led them and formed their ranks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A younger brother of the slain was he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The slain was braver. Though the warriors grieved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lose their glorious chief, they did not lack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A general. Forty dark ships followed him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then they who dwelt in Phera:, by the lake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boebeis, and in Boebe, Glaphyrcc,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nobly built Iolchos, came to Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Filling eleven galleys, and obeyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eumelus, whom Alcestis the divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bore to Admetus⁠—fairest, she, of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The house of Pelias and of womankind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Those from Methone and Olizon’s rocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Meliboea and Thaumacia, filled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seven ships, with Philoctetes for their chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A warrior skilled to bend the bow. Each bark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Held fifty rowers, bowmen all, and armèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For stubborn battle. But their leader lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far in an island, suffering grievous pangs⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hallowed isle of Lemnos. There the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left him, in torture from a venomed wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made by a serpent’s fangs. He lay and pined.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet was the moment near when they who thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forsook their king should think of him again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime his troops were not without a chief;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though greatly they desired their ancient lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For now the base-born Medon marshalled them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Son of Oileus. Rhene brought him forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that destroyer of strong fortresses.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The men of Tricca and Ithome’s hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they who held Oechalia and the town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Eurytus the (Echalian, had for chiefs Two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sons of Aesculapius, healers both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And skilful⁠—Podalirius one, and one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Machaon. Thirty hollow barks were theirs.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The dwellers of Ormenium, they whose homes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were by the Hyperian fount, and they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who held Asterium and the snowy peaks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Titanus, obeyed Eurypylus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Evaemon’s son, and far renowned. A fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of forty dark-ribbed vessels followed him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Those who possessed Argissa, those who held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gyrtonè, Orthè, and Helonè, those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dwelt in Oloösson with white walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sturdy warrior Polypoetes led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Son of Pirithoüs, who derived his birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From deathless Jove. Hippodameia bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warrior to Pirithoüs on the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he took vengeance on the shaggy brood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Centaurs, and from Pelion drove them forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Aethica?. Yet not alone in rule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Polypoetes, for Leonteus, sprung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the large-souled Coronus, Caeneus’ son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shared with him the command. With them a fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of forty dark-hulled vessels came to Troy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Guneus came, with two and twenty ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Cythus. Under his command he held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Enienes, and that sturdy race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Periboean warriors, and the men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who built on cold Dodona, or who tilled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fields where pleasant Titaresius flows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And into Peneus pours his gentle stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet with its silver eddies mingles not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But floats upon the current’s face like oil⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Stygian stream by which the immortals swear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With Prothous, Tenthredon’s son, there came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warriors of Magnesia, who abode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Peneus, and by Pelion hung with woods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift-footed Prothous led these. They came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With forty dark-hulled galleys to the war.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These were the chiefs and princes of the Greeks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, Muse, who most excelled among the kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And which the noblest steeds, of all that came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the two sons of Atreus to the war?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The noblest steeds were those in Pherae bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, guided by Eumelus, flew like birds⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alike in hue and age; the plummet showed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their height the same, and both were mares, and, reared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Phoebus of the silver bow among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The meadows of Pieria, they became</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The terror of the bloody battle-field.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mightiest of the chiefs, while yet in wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles kept aloof, was Ajax, son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Telamon; yet was Pelides far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The greater warrior, and the steeds which bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That perfect hero were of noblest breed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his beaked galleys, swift to cut the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles lay, meanwhile, and nursed the wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bore to Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shepherd of the people. On the beach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His warriors took their sport with javelins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And quoits and bows, while near the chariots tied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The horses, standing, browsed on lotus-leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And parsley from the marshes. But beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tents the closely covered chariots stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While idly through the camp the charioteers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hither and thither sauntering, missed the sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their brave lord and went not to the field.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The army swept the earth as when a fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devours the herbage of the plains. The ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groaned under them as when the Thunderer Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In anger with his lightnings smites the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About Typhosus⁠—where they say he lies⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Arimi. So fearfully the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groaned under that swift army as it moved.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now to the Trojans the swift Iris came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A messenger from aegis-bearing Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tidings of bale she brought. They all had met⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old men and youths⁠—in council at the gates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Priam’s mansion. There did Iris take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her station near the multitude, and spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In voice and gesture like Polites, son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Priam, who, confiding in his speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had stood a watcher for the sons of Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On aged Aesyeta’s lofty tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To give them warning when the Achaian host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should issue from their galleys. Thus disguised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift Iris spake her message from the skies:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Father! thou art delighted with much speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As once in time of peace, but now’t is war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inevitable war, and close at hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have seen many battles, yet have ne’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beheld such armies, and so vast as these⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In number like the sands and summer leaves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They march across the plain, prepared to give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Battle beneath the city walls. To thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Hector, it belongs to heed my voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And counsel. Many are the allies within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The walls of this great town of Priam, men ion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of diverse race and speech. Let every chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these array his countrymen for war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And give them orders for the roming fight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She spake, and Hector heeded and obeyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The counsel of the goddess; he dismissed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The assembly; all the Trojans rushed to arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the gates were opened. Horse and foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poured forth together in tumultuous haste.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In the great plain before the city stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mound of steep ascent on every side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men named it Batiea, but the gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Called it the swift Myrinna’s tomb; and here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mustered the sons of Troy and their allies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great Hector of the beamy helm, the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Priam, led the Trojan race. The host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of greatest multitude was marshalled there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there the bravest, mighty with the spear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Aeneas marshalled the Dardanian troops⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brave son of Anchises. Venus bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warrior to Anchises on the heights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ida, where the mortal lover met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goddess. Yet he ruled them not alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two chiefs, Antenor’s sons Archelochus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Acamas, were with him in command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expert in all the many arts of war.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Trojans from Zeleia, opulent men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who drank the dark Aesepus⁠—over these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ruled Pandarus, Lycaon’s valiant son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom the god Apollo gave his bow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The troops from Adrasteia, they who dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within Apaesus’ walls, or tilled the soil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Pityeia and Tereia’s heights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were led by Amphius and Adrastus, clad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In linen corselets for the war, the sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Merops the Percosian, skilled beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All other men in the diviner’s art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor would he that his sons should seek the field</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of slaughter. They obeyed him not; the fates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Decreed their early death and urged them on.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The dwellers of Percote, Practium,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Sestus, and Abydus, and divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arisba, followed Asius, great among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heroes and the son of Hyrtacus⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asius, who came with strong and fiery steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Borne from Arisba and from Selleis’ banks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hippothoüs over the Pelasgian tribes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Skilled spearman, who abode among the fields</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the deep-soiled Larissa⁠—bore command⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hippothoüs with Pyteus, who derived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their race from Mars, and for their father claimed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pelasgian Lethus, son of Teutamus.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Acamas, and Peiroüs, valiant chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were captains of the Thracian men, whose fields</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were bounded by the rushing Hellespont.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Euphemus led the Cicones, expert</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wield the spear in fight. The nobly-born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Troezenus was his father. Ceas’ son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pyraechmes with Paeonia’s archers came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the broad Axius in far Amydon⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Axius, the fairest river of the earth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Pytamenes, a chief of fearless heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Led from the region of the Eneti,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where first the stubborn race of mules was bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Paphlagonian warriors, they who held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cytorus, Sesamus, and fair abodes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Built where Parthenius wanders on, and those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dwelt in Cromna and Aegialus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the lofty Erythinian heights.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Hodius and Epistrophus led on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Halezonians from the distant land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Alyba, where ores of silver lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Chromis and the augur Ennomus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were leaders of the Mysians; but his skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saved not the augur from the doom of death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slain by the swift of foot, Aeacides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With other men of Troy where Xanthus flows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Phorcys and Ascanius, who was like</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A god in beauty, led the Phrygian troops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From far Ascania, eager for the fray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Antiphus and Mesthles were the chiefs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Maeonian warriors, reared beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ships of Tmolus. There Gygaea’s lake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought forth both chieftains to Pylsemenes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nastes was leader of the Carian troops,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who spake in barbarous accents and possessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Miletus and the leafy mountain heights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where dwell the Phthirians, and Maeauder’s stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And airy peaks of Mycalè. O’er these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amphimachus and Nastes held command⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amphimachus and Nastes, far renowned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sons of Nomion, him who, madly vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went to the battle pranked like a young girl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In golden ornaments. They spared him not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bitter doom of death; he fell beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hand of swift Aeacides within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The river’s channel. There the great in war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles, spoiled Nomion of his gold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sarpedon and the noble Glaucus bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rule o’er the Eycians coming from afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where eddying Xanthus runs through Lycia’s meads.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
