<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book VIII: The Second Battle</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Second Battle</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">A council of the gods⁠—Jupiter forbids them to take part with either side⁠—Minerva permitted to advise the Greeks⁠—Beginning of the second battle⁠—The fate of the two armies weighed in the scales by Jupiter⁠—Nestor rescued by Diomed⁠—Exploits of Diomed and of Hector⁠—Neptune denies the request of Juno to aid the Greeks⁠—Teucer wounded by Hector⁠—Juno and Minerva restrained by Jupiter from going to the aid of the Greeks, who are driven within their entrenchments⁠—The Trojans pass the night before the Greek camp, and kindle fires around it.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Now morn in saffron robes had shed her light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er all the earth, when Jove the Thunderer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Summoned the gods to council on the heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many-peaked Olympus. He addressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assembly, and all listened as he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear, all ye gods and all ye goddesses!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I declare the thought within my breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let none of either sex presume to break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The law I give, but cheerfully obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That my design may sooner be fulfilled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoever, stealing from the rest, shall seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid the Grecian cause, or that of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to Olympus, scourged and in disgrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall he be brought, or I will seize and hurl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The offender down to rayless Tartarus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep, deep in the great gulf below the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With iron gates and threshold forged of brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As far beneath the shades as earth from heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shall he learn how greatly I surpass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All other gods in power. Try if ye will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye gods, that all may know: suspend from heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden chain; let all the immortal host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cling to it from below: ye could not draw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strive as ye might, the all-disposing Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From heaven to earth. And yet, if I should choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To draw it upward to me, I should lift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With it and you, the earth itself and sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together, and I then would bind the chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the summit of the Olympian mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they should hang aloft. So far my power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surpasses all the power of gods and men.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and all the great assembly, hushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silence, wondered at his threatening words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until at length the blue-eyed Pallas said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Our Father, son of Saturn, mightiest as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the potentates, we know thy power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not to be withstood, yet are we moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pity for the warlike Greeks, who bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An evil fate and waste away in war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If such be thy command, we shall refrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From mingling in the combat, yet will aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks with counsel which may be their guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest by thy wrath they perish utterly.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Cloud-compeller Jove replied, and smiled:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tritonia, daughter dear, be comforted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I spake not in the anger of my heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I have naught but kind intents for thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and to his chariot yoked the steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleet, brazen-footed, and with flowing manes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold, and put his golden armor on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took the golden scourge, divinely wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, mounting, touched the coursers with the lash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To urge them onward. Not unwillingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew they between the earth and starry heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until he came to Ida, moist with springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nurse of savage beasts, and to the height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Gargarus, where lay his sacred field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where his fragrant altar fumed. He checked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their course, and there the Father of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And men released them from the yoke and caused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloud to gather round them. Then he sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exulting in the fullness of his might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the summit, whence his eye beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The towers of Ilium and the ships of Greece.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now in their tents the long-haired Greeks had shared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hasty meal, and girded on their arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans, also, in their city armed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Themselves for war, as eager for the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though fewer; for a hard necessity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forced them to combat for their little ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wives. They set the city-portals wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forth the people issued, foot and horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together, and a mighty din arose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, when host met host, their shields and spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were mingled in disorder; men of might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encountered, cased in mail, and bucklers clashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their bosses; loud the clamor: cries of pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And boastful shouts arose from those who fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those who slew, and earth was drenched with blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While yet ’twas morning, and the holy light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of day grew bright, the men of both the hosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>ere smitten and were slain; but when the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood high in middle heaven, the All-Father took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His golden scales, and in them laid the fates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which bring the sleep of death⁠—the fate of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who tamed the Trojan steeds, and those who warred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Greece in brazen armor. By the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He held the balance, and, behold, the fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greece in that day’s fight sank down until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It touched the nourishing earth, while that of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose and flew upward toward the spacious heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that the Godhead thundered terribly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ida’s height, and sent his lightnings down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Achaian army. They beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mute amazement and grew pale with fear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then neither dared Idomeneus remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Agamemnon, on the ground, nor stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chieftains Ajax, ministers of Mars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gerenian Nestor, guardian of the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone was left behind, and he remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwillingly. A steed of those that drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His car was sorely wounded by a shaft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Alexander, fair-haired Helen’s spouse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent from his bow. It pierced the forehead where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mane begins, and where a wound is death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arrow pierced him to the brain; he reared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whirled in torture with the wound, and scared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fellow-coursers. While the aged man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to sever with his sword the thongs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bound him to the car, the rapid steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector bore their valiant master on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the pursuing crowd. The aged chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had perished then, if gallant Diomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not perceived his plight. He lifted up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His voice, and, shouting to Ulysses, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“High-born Ulysses, man of subtle shifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Laertes, whither dost thou flee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why like a coward turn thy back? Beware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest there some weapon smite thee. Stay and guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This aged warrior from his furious foe.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he; but the much-enduring man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, heard not the reproof, and passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rapidly toward the hollow ships of Greece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tydides, single-handed, made his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the foremost warriors, till he stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the horses of the aged son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Neleus, and in wingèd accents said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The younger warriors press thee sore, old chief!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy strength gives way; the weariness of age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is on thee; thy attendant is not strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy steeds are slow. Mount, then, my car, and see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What Trojan horses are; how rapidly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They turn to right and left, and chase and flee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I took them from the terror of the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas. To our servants leave thine own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While we with these assault the Trojan knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And teach even Hector that the spear I wield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can make as furious havoc as his own.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and Nestor, the Gerenian knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Complied. The two attendants, valiant men⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sthenelus and the good Eurymedon⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took charge of Nestor’s steeds. The chieftains climbed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The car of Diomed, and Nestor took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his hand the embroidered reins and lashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horses with the scourge. They quickly came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hector. As the Trojan hastened on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Tydeus hurled a spear; it missed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But spared not Eniopeus, him who held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The reins, the hero’s charioteer, and son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brave Thebaeus. In the breast between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The paps it smote him; from the car he fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the swift horses started back; his soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strength passed from him. Hector bitterly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grieved for his death, yet left him where he fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sought another fitting charioteer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor had the fiery coursers long to wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A guide, for valiant Archeptolemus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Iphitus, was near at hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And him he caused to mount the chariot drawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his fleet steeds, and gave his hand the reins.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then great had been the slaughter; fearful deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had then been done; the Trojans had been scared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into their town like lambs into the fold⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not the Father of the immortal gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mortal men beheld, and from on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Terribly thundered, sending to the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bolt of fire. He flung it down before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The car of Diomed; and fiercely glared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blazing sulphur; both the frightened steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cowered trembling by the chariot. Nestor’s hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let fall the embroidered reins; his spirit sank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fear, and thus he said to Diomed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Tydides, turn thy firm-paced steeds, and flee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost thou not see that victory from Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attends thee not? Today doth Saturn’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Award the glory to the Trojan chief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter he will make it ours, if such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be his good pleasure. No man, though he be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mightiest among men, can thwart the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jupiter, with whom abides all power.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The great in battle, Diomed, replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Truly, O ancient man, thou speakest well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this it is that grieves me to the heart⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Hector to the Trojan host will say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I put to flight Tydides, and he sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shelter among his ships.’ Thus will he boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter; may earth open then for me!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Nestor, the Gerenian knight, rejoined:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What, son of warlike Tydeus, hast thou said?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Hector call thee faint of heart and weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans and Dardanians, and the wives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the stout-hearted Trojans armed with shields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose husbands in their youthful prime thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath laid in dust, will not believe his words.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, he turned the firm-paced steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rearward, and mingled with the flying crowd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the Trojans and their leader gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty cry, and poured on them a storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of deadly darts, and crested Hector raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His thundering voice and shouted after them:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O son of Tydeus! The swift-riding Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have honored thee beyond all other men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At banquets, with high place and delicate meats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flowing cups. They will despise thee now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou art like a woman. Timorous girl!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take thyself hence, and never think that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall yield to thee, that thou mayst climb our towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear away our women in thy ships;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I shall give thee first the doom of death.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and Diomed, in doubtful mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Questioned his spirit whether he should turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His steeds and fight with Hector. Thrice the thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose within his mind, and thrice on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uttered the all-forecasting Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His thunder from the Idaean mount, a sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of victory changing to the Trojan side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Hector to the Trojans called aloud:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Trojans and Lycians all, and ye who close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In deadly fight, the sons of Dardanus!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Acquit yourselves like men, my friends; recall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your fiery valor now, for I perceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Saturn doth award to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Victory and vast renown, and to the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Destruction. Fools! who built this slender wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which we contemn, which cannot stand before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strength I bring; our steeds can overleap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trench they digged. When I shall reach their fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember the consuming power of fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may give their vessels to the flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hew the Achaians down beside their prows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While they are wrapped in the bewildering smoke.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and then he cheered his coursers thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Xanthus, Podargus, Lampus nobly bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Aethon, now repay the generous care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pleasant grain which my Andromache,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughter of great Eëtion, largely gives.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She mingles wine that ye may drink at will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere yet she ministers to me, who boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be her youthful husband. Let us now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursue with fiery haste, that we may seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shield of Nestor, the great fame of which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has reached to heaven⁠—an orb of massive gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to the handles. Let us from the limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Diomed, the tamer of fleet steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strip off the glorious mail that Vulcan forged:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This done, our hope may be that all the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will climb their galleys and depart tonight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So boasted he; but queenly Juno’s ire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was kindled, and she shuddered on her throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till great Olympus trembled. Thus she spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Neptune, mighty ruler of the deep:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Earth-shaker! Thou who rulest far and wide!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is there no pity for the perishing Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within that breast of thine? They bring to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Helicè and Aegae costly gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many, wherefore thy desire should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they may win the victory. If the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who favor the Achaians should combine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive the Trojans back, and hold in check</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-thundering Jupiter, the God would sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sullen grief on Ida’s top alone.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Earth-shaking Neptune answered in disdain:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Juno, rash in speech! What words are these?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think not that I can wish to join the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In conflict with the monarch Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Saturn, mightier than we all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So held they colloquy. Meanwhile the space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt the galleys and the trench and wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was crowded close with steeds and shielded men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Hector, son of Priam, terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Mars the lightning-footed, drave them on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him. Jove decreed him such renown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now would he have given that noble fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the consuming flame, if Juno, queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heaven, had not beheld, and moved the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Agamemnon to exhort the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they should turn and combat. With quick steps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He passed beside the fleet, among the tents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing in his strong hand his purple robe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And climbed the huge black galley which had brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses to the war⁠—for in the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It lay, and thence the king might send his voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To either side, as far as to the tents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ajax and Achilles, who had moored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their galleys at the different extremes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the long camp, confiding in their might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of arm and their own valor. Thence he called,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With loud, clear utterance, to the Achaian host:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Greeks! Shame on ye! Cravens who excel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In form alone! Where now are all the boasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of your invincible valor⁠—the vain words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye uttered pompously when at the feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Lemnos sitting ye devoured the flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hornèd beeves, and drank from bowls of wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flower-crowned, and bragged that each of you would be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A match for fivescore Trojans, or for twice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fivescore? And now we all are not a match</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Hector singly, who will give our fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon to consuming flames. O Father Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was ever mighty monarch visited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thee with such affliction, or so robbed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of high renown! And yet in my good ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound to this luckless coast, I never passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thy fair altars that I did not burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fat and thighs of oxen, with a prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I might sack the well-defended Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now be at least one wish of mine fulfilled⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we may yet escape and get us hence;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor let the Trojans thus destroy the Greeks.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and wept. The All-Father, pitying him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consented that his people should escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The threatened ruin. Instantly he sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eagle, bird of surest augury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, bearing in his talons a young fawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The offspring of a nimble-footed roe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dropped it at the fair altar where the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paid sacrifice to Panomphaean Jove.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And they, when they beheld, and knew that Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had sent the bird, took courage, rallying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rushed against the Trojans. Then no chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the Greeks⁠—though many they⁠—could boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he before Tydides urged his steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sudden speed and drave them o’er the trench,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mingled in the combat. First of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He struck down Agelaus, Phradmon’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed as he was, who turned his car to fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as he turned, Tydides with his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transfixed his back between the shoulder-blades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drave the weapon through his breast. He fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To earth, his armor clashing with his fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Agamemnon followed, and with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother Menelaus; after these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chieftains Ajax, fearful in their strength;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idomeneus, and he who bore his arms⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meriones, like Mars in battle-field; as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eurypylus, Evaemon’s glorious son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ninthly Teucer came, who bent his bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the shield of Ajax Telamon⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Ajax moved his shield from side to side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thence the archer looked abroad, and aimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arrows thence. Whoever in the throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was struck fell lifeless. Teucer all the while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As hides a child behind his mother’s robe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheltered himself by Ajax, whose great shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concealed the chief from sight. What Trojan first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did faithful Teucer slay? Orsilochus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daetor, and Ophelestes, Ormenus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chromius, and Lycophontes nobly born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hamopaon, Polyremon’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Melanippus⁠—one by one the shafts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Teucer stretched them on their mother earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Agamemnon, king of men, rejoiced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he beheld him, with his sturdy bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breaking the serried phalanxes of Troy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came, and, standing near, bespake him thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Beloved Teucer! Son of Telamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prince of the people! Ever be thy shafts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aimed thus, and thou shalt be the light and pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greece, and of thy father Telamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who reared thee from a little child with care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own halls, though spurious was thy birth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go on to do him honor, though he now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be far away. And here I say to thee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will keep my word⁠—if Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Aegis-bearer and Minerva deign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To let me level the strong walls of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee will I assign the noblest prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After my own⁠—a tripod, or two steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chariot, or a wife to share thy bed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the blameless Teucer made reply:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why, glorious son of Atreus, wouldst thou thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Admonish me, while yet I do my best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pause not in the combat? From the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we began to drive the enemy back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ilium, I have smitten and have slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their warriors with my bow. Eight barbed shafts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sent, and each has pierced some warlike youth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this fierce wolf-dog have I failed to strike.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and sent another arrow forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Hector with an eager aim. It missed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its mark, but struck Gorgythion down, the brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blameless son of Priam; through his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arrow went. Fair Castianira brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warrior forth⁠—a dame from Aesyma,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful as a goddess. As within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A garden droops a poppy to the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bowed by its weight and by the rains of spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So drooped his head within the heavy casque.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then did Teucer send another shaft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Hector, eager still to smite. It missed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its aim again, for Phoebus turned aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arrow, but it struck the charioteer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector, Archeptolemus the brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When rushing to the fight, and pierced his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to the nipple; from the car he fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift steeds started back, and from his limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life and strength departed. A deep grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his slain charioteer came darkly o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mind of Hector, yet, though sorrowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He left him where he fell, and straightway called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cebriones, his brother, who was near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mount and take the reins. Cebriones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard and obeyed. Then from the shining car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaped Hector with a mighty cry, and seized</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ponderous stone, and, bent to crush him, ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Teucer, who had from his quiver drawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of his sharpest arrows, placing it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the bowstring. As he drew the bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strong-armed Hector hurled the jagged stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote him near the shoulder, where the neck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And breast are sundered by the collar bone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fatal spot. The bowstring brake; the arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell nerveless; on his knees the archer sank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dropped the bow. Then did not Ajax leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fallen brother to the foe, but walked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him, sheltering him beneath his shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till two dear friends of his⁠—Menestheus, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Echius, and Alastor nobly born⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approached, and took him up and carried him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavily groaning, to the hollow ships.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then did Olympian Jove again inspire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan host with valor, and they drave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians backward to the yawning trench.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Hector came, with fury in his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the foremost warriors. As a hound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sure of his own swift feet, attacks behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lion or wild boar, and tears his flank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet warily observes him as he turns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Hector followed close the long-haired Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever slew the hindmost as they fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet now, when they in flight had crossed again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trench and palisades, and many a one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had died by Trojan hands, they made a halt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before their ships, and bade each other stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifted up their hands and prayed aloud as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the gods; while Hector, urging on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His long-maned steeds, and with stern eyes that seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eyes of Gorgon or of murderous Mars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither and thither swept across the field.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The white-armed Juno saw, and, sorrowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Addressed Minerva with these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ah me! Thou daughter of the God who bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aegis, shall we not descend to aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The perishing Greeks in their extremity?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cruel doom is theirs, to fall, destroyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By one man’s rage⁠—the terrible assault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector, son of Priam, who has made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insufferable havoc in the field.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus in turn the blue-eyed Pallas spake:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That warrior long ere this had lost his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by the Greeks on his paternal soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that my father’s mind is warped by wrath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unjust to me and harsh, he thwarts my aims,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgetting all I did for Hercules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His son⁠—how often, when Eurystheus set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A task too hard for him, I saved his life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To heaven he raised his eyes and wept, and Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despatched me instantly to succor him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet if I, in my forecasting mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had known all this when he was bid to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From strong-walled Erebus the dog of hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had not safely crossed the gulf of Styx.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now Jove hates me; now he grants the wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thetis, who hath kissed his knees and touched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beard caressingly, and prayed that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would crown the overthrower of walled towns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, with great honor. Well, the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will come when he shall call me yet again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dear Minerva. Hasten now to yoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For us thy firm-paced steeds, while in the halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of aegis-bearing Jupiter I brace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My armor on for war⁠—and I shall see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Hector of the beamy helm, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Priam, will rejoice when we appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the field again. Assuredly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men of Troy shall die, to feast the birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of prey and dogs beside the Grecian fleet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She ended, and the white-armed deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Juno obeyed her. Juno the august,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty Saturn’s daughter, hastily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caparisoned the golden-bitted steeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile, Minerva on the palace-floor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jupiter let drop the gorgeous robe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many hues, which her own hands had wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, putting on the Cloud-compeller’s mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood armed for cruel war. And then she climbed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious car, and took in hand the spear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huge, heavy, strong⁠—with which she overthrows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The serried phalanxes of valiant men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whene’er this daughter of the Almighty One</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is angered. Juno bore the lash, and urged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coursers to their speed. The gates of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opened before them of their own accord⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gates guarded by the Hours, on whom the care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the great heaven and of Olympus rests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To open or to close the wall of cloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through these they guided their impatient steeds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From Ida Jupiter beheld, in wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And summoned Iris of the golden wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade her do this errand: “Speed thee hence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleet Iris! Turn them back; allow them not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to defy me: it is not for them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To engage with me in war. I give my word⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shall it lack fulfilment⁠—I will make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift steeds lame that draw their car, and hurl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The riders down, and dash the car itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fragments. Ten long years shall wear away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before they cease to suffer from the wounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made by the thunderbolt. Minerva thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May learn the fate of those who strive with Jove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Juno I am less displeased, for she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is ever bent to thwart my purposes.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and Iris, with the tempest’s speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Departing, bore the message from the heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ida to the great Olympus, where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the foremost passes of the mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All seamed with hollow vales, she met and stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pair, delivering thus the word of Jove:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now whither haste ye? What strange madness fires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your breasts? The son of Saturn suffers not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye befriend the Greeks. He threatens thus⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will fulfil his threat⁠—that he will make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coursers lame that draw your car, and hurl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The riders down, and dash the car itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fragments, and that ten long years must pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere ye shall cease to suffer from the wounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made by the thunderbolt. So shalt thou learn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Pallas! what it is to strive with Jove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Juno is he less displeased, for she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is ever bent to thwart his purposes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou, he says, art guilty above all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shameless as a hound, if thou dare lift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy massive spear against thy father Jove.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake fleet-footed Iris, and withdrew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus again to Pallas Juno said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Child of the Aegis-bearer! Let us strive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Jove no longer for the sake of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let one perish and another live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As chance may rule the hour, and let the God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Communing with his secret mind, mete out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Greeks and Trojans their just destiny.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and turned the firm-paced coursers back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coursers with fair-flowing manes. The Hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unyoked them, bound them to the ambrosial stalls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaned against the shining walls the car;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Juno and Minerva went among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other deities and took their place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon their golden seats, though sad at heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then with his steeds, and in his bright-wheeled car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came Jove from Ida to the dwelling-place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gods upon Olympus. There did he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who shakes the islands loose the steeds and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chariot to its place, and o’er it spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its covering of lawn. The Thunderer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seated himself upon his golden throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great Olympus trembling as he stepped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Juno and Minerva sat apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together, nor saluted him, nor asked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of aught; but he perceived their thoughts and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Juno and Pallas! Why so sad? Not long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye toiled in glorious battle to destroy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans, whom ye hold in bitter hate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This strength of mine, and this invincible arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not all the gods upon the Olympian mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can turn to flight, while your fair limbs were seized</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With trembling ere ye entered on the shock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And havoc of the war. Now let me say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well the event would have fulfilled my words⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, smitten with the thunder from my hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your chariots never would have brought you back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this Olympus and the abode of gods.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; while Pallas and the queen of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repined with close-pressed lips, and in their hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devised new mischiefs for the Trojan race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent Minerva sat, nor dared express as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The anger that she bore her father Jove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Juno could not curb her wrath, and spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What words, austere Saturnius, hast thou said?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art, we know, invincible in might;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet must we sorrow for the heroic Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, by a cruel fate, are perishing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We stand aloof from war, if thou require;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet would we counsel the Achaian host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest by thy wrath they perish utterly.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the Cloud-compeller, answering, said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Juno, large-eyed and august, if thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look forth tomorrow, thou shalt then behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The all-powerful son of Saturn laying waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With greater havoc still the mighty host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of warlike Greeks. For Hector, great in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall pause not from the conflict, till he rouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift-paced son of Peleus at the ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, pent in narrow space, the armies fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For slain Patroclus: such the will of fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As for thyself, I little heed thy rage:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even shouldst thou wander to the realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where earth and ocean end, where Saturn sits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside Iapetus, and neither light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of overgoing suns nor breath of wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refreshes them, but gulfs of Tartarus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surround them⁠—shouldst thou even thither bend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy way, I shall not heed thy rage, who art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all others shamelessly perverse.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ceased; but white-armed Juno answered not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now into the sea the sun’s bright light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went down, and o’er the foodful earth was drawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Night’s shadow. Most unwillingly the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy beheld the sunset. To the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eagerly wished the welcome darkness came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then from the fleet illustrious Hector led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans, and beside the eddying stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a clear space uncumbered by the slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held council. There, alighting from their cars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They listened to the words that Hector spake⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector, beloved of Jove. He held a spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In length eleven cubits, with a blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of glittering brass, bound with a ring of gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this he leaned, and spake these wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear me, ye Trojans, Dardans, and allies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now I thought that, having first destroyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaian host and fleet, we should return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This night to wind-swept Ilium. To their aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The darkness comes, and saves the Greeks, and saves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their galleys ranged along the ocean-side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obey we, then, the dark-browed night; prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our meal; unyoke the steeds with flowing manes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set their food before them. Bring at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oxen and fatlings of the flock from town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from your dwellings bread and pleasant wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let us gather store of wood, to feed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A multitude of blazing fires all night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Morning, daughter of the Dawn, appear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fires that shall light the sky, lest in the hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of darkness with their ships the long-haired Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attempt escape across the mighty deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, that they may not climb their decks unharmed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let every foeman bear a wound to cure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At home⁠—an arrow-wound or gash of spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given as he leaps on board. So other foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall dread a conflict with the knights of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let the heralds, dear to Jove, command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all grown youths and hoary-headed men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep watch about the city in the towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Built by the gods; and let the feebler sex</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindle large fires upon their hearths at home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let the guard be strengthened, lest the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should steal into the city while its sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are all abroad. Thus let it be till morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave Trojans! I but speak of what the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Requires, and on the morrow I shall speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what the Trojan knights have then to do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My prayer to Jove and to the other gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my hope is, that I may drive away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These curs, brought hither by an evil fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their black ships. All night will we keep watch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, arming, with the early morn renew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The desperate conflict at the hollow ships.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shall I see if valiant Diomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tydides has the power to make me leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Grecian galleys for the city-walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whether I shall slay him with my spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take his bloody spoils. Tomorrow’s sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will make his valor known, if he withstand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assault of this my weapon. Yet I think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunrise will behold him slain among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first, with many comrades lying round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would that I knew myself as certainly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Secure from death and the decays of age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to be held in honor like the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo and Minerva, as I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This day will bring misfortune to the Greeks!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Hector spake, and all the Trojan host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Applauded; from the yoke forthwith they looped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweaty steeds, and bound them to the cars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With halters; to the town they sent in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For oxen and the fatlings of the flock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to their homes for bread and pleasant wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gathered fuel in large store. The winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore up the fragrant fumes from earth to heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, high in hope, they sat the whole night through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In warlike lines, and many watch-fires blazed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when in heaven the stars look brightly forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round the clear-shining moon, while not a breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stirs in the depths of air, and all the stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are seen, and gladness fills the shepherd’s heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many fires in sight of Ilium blazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lit by the sons of Troy, between the ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eddying Xanthus: on the plain there shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand; fifty warriors by each fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat in its light. Their steeds beside the cars⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Champing their oats and their white barley⁠—stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waited for the golden morn to rise.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
