<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 1: The Contention of Achilles and Agamemnon</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Contention of Achilles and Agamemnon</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The visit of Chryses, Priest of Apollo, to Agamemnon, asking the ransom of his daughter⁠—Refusal of Agamemnon⁠—A pestilence sent by Apollo upon the Greek army⁠—A Council called by Achilles⁠—The cause of the pestilence declared by the Seer Calchas⁠—Dispute between Agamemnon and Achilles, which ends with the taking away of Briseis from Achilles⁠—The daughter of Chryses restored to him⁠—Visit of Thetis to Jupiter, who promises to avenge Achilles⁠—Mutual chiding of Jupiter and Juno.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>O Goddess! sing the wrath of Peleus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles; sing the deadly wrath that brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woes numberless upon the Greeks, and swept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hades many a valiant soul, and gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their limbs a prey to dogs and birds of air⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so had Jove appointed⁠—from the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the two chiefs, Atrides, king of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And great Achilles, parted first as foes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Which of the gods put strife between the chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they should thus contend? Latona’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Jove’s. Incensed against the king, he bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A deadly pestilence appear among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The army, and the men were perishing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Atreus’ son with insult had received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chryses the priest, who to the Grecian fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to redeem his daughter, offering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncounted ransom. In his hand he bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fillets of Apollo, archer-god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the golden sceptre, and he sued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the Greeks, but chiefly to the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus, the two leaders of the host:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye sons of Atreus, and ye other chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well-greaved Achaians, may the gods who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Olympus give you to o’erthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city of Priam, and in safety reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your homes; but give me my beloved child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take her ransom, honoring him who sends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arrows far, Apollo, son of Jove.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then all the other Greeks, applauding, bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revere the priest and take the liberal gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He offered, but the counsel did not please</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides Agamemnon; he dismissed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The priest with scorn, and added threatening words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Old man, let me not find thee loitering here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the roomy ships, or coming back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter, lest the fillet thou dost bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sceptre of thy god protect thee not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This maiden I release not till old age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall overtake her in my Argive home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from her native country, where her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall throw the shuttle and shall dress my couch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, chafe me not, if thou wouldst safely go.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; the aged man in fear obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mandate, and in silence walked apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the many-sounding ocean-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fervently he prayed the monarch-god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo, golden-haired Latona’s son:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear me, thou bearer of the silver bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who guardest Chrysa, and the holy isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Cilia, and art lord in Tenedos,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Smintheus! if I ever helped to deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy glorious temple, if I ever burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thy altar the fat thighs of goats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bullocks, grant my prayer, and let thy shafts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avenge upon the Greeks the tears I shed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he supplicating, and to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus Apollo hearkened. Down he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down from the summit of the Olympian mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrathful in heart; his shoulders bore the bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hollow quiver; there the arrows rang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the shoulders of the angry god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on he moved. He came as comes the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, seated from the ships aloof, sent forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An arrow; terrible was heard the clang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that resplendent bow. At first he smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mules and the swift dogs, and then on man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned the deadly arrow. All around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glared evermore the frequent funeral piles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine days already had his shafts been showered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the host, and now, upon the tenth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles called the people of the camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To council. Juno, of the snow-white arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had moved his mind to this, for she beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sorrow that the men were perishing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the assembly met and now was full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood swift Achilles in the midst and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“To me it seems, Atrides, that ’twere well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since now our aim is baffled, to return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homeward, if death o’ertake us not; for war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pestilence at once destroy the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let us first consult some seer or priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or dream-interpreter⁠—for even dreams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are sent by Jove⁠—and ask him by what cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus Apollo has been angered thus;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If by neglected vows or hecatombs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whether savor of fat bulls and goats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May move the god to stay the pestilence.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and took again his seat; and next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose Calchas, son of Thestor, and the chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of augurs, one to whom were known things past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And present and to come. He, through the art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of divination, which Apollo gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had guided Iliumward the ships of Greece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With words well ordered courteously he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Achilles, loved of Jove, thou biddest me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Explain the wrath of Phoebus, monarch-god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sends afar his arrows. Willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will I make known the cause; but covenant thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swear to stand prepared, by word and hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring me succor. For my mind misgives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he who rules the Argives, and to whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaian race are subject, will be wroth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sovereign is too strong for humbler men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though he keep his choler down awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It rankles, till he sate it, in his heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now consider: wilt thou hold me safe?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Achilles, the swift-footed, answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fear nothing, but speak boldly out whate’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou knowest, and declare the will of Heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For by Apollo, dear to Jove, whom thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calchas, dost pray to, when thou givest forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred oracles to men of Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man, while yet I live, and see the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of day, shall lay a violent hand on thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among our roomy ships; no man of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Grecian armies, though thou name the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Agamemnon, whose high boast it is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stand in power and rank above them all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Encouraged thus, the blameless seer went on:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Tis not neglected vows or hecatombs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That move him, but the insult shown his priest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Agamemnon spurned, when he refused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To set his daughter free, and to receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her ransom. Therefore sends the archer-god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These woes, and still will send them on the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ever will withdraw his heavy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From our destruction, till the dark-eyed maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freely, and without ransom, be restored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her beloved father, and with her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sacred hecatomb to Chrysa sent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So may we haply pacify the god.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, the augur took his seat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the hero-son of Atreus rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide-ruling Agamemnon, greatly chafed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His gloomy heart was full of wrath, his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sparkled like fire; he fixed a menacing look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full on the augur Calchas, and began:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Prophet of evil! never hadst thou yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cheerful word for me. To mark the signs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of coming mischief is thy great delight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good dost thou ne’er foretell not bring to pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now thou pratest, in thine auguries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the Greeks, how that the archer-god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afflicts us thus, because I would not take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The costly ransom offered to redeem us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The virgin child of Chryses. ’Twas my choice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep her with me, for I prize her more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than Clytemnestra, bride of my young years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deem her not less nobly graced than she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In form and feature, mind and pleasing arts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet will I give her back, if that be best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For gladly would I see my people saved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this destruction. Let meet recompense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime, be ready, that I be not left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone of all the Greeks, without my prize.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That were not seemly. All of you perceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That now my share of spoil has passed from me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To him the great Achilles, swift of foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replied: “Renowned Atrides, greediest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men, where wilt thou that our noble Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find other spoil for thee, since none is set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart, a common store? The trophies brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From towns which we have sacked have all been shared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among us, and we could not without shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid every warrior bring his portion back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield, then, the maiden to the god, and we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians, freely will appoint for thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threefold and fourfold recompense, should Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give up to sack this well-defended Troy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the king Agamemnon answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, use no craft, all valiant as thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Godlike Achilles; thou hast rot the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To circumvent nor to persuade me thus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think’st thou that, while thou keepest safe thy prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall sit idly down, deprived of mine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou bid’st me give the maiden back. ’Tis well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If to my hands the noble Greeks shall bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The worth of what I lose, and in a shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That pleases me. Else will I come myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seize and bear away thy prize, or that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ajax or Ulysses, leaving him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whom I take his share with cause for rage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another time we will confer of this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now come, and forth into the great salt sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Launch a black ship, and muster on the deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men skilled to row, and put a hecatomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On board, and let the fair-cheeked maid embark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chryseis. Send a prince to bear command⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ajax, Idomeneus, or the divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses;⁠—or thyself, Pelides, thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most terrible of men, that with due rites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou soothe the anger of the archer-god.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Achilles the swift-footed, with stern look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus answered: “Ha, thou mailed in impudence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bent on lucre! Who of all the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can willingly obey thee, on the march,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or bravely battling with the enemy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I came not to this war because of wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Done to me by the valiant sons of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No feud had I with them; they never took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My beeves or horses, nor, in Phthia’s realm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep-soiled and populous, spoiled my harvest fields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many a shadowy mount between us lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waters of the wide-resounding sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man unabashed! we follow thee that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mayst glory in avenging upon Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grudge of Menelaus and thy own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shameless one! and yet thou hast for this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor thanks nor care. Thou threatenest now to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From me the prize for which I bore long toils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle; and the Greeks decreed it mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never take an equal share with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of booty when the Grecian host has sacked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some populous Trojan town. My hands perform</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The harder labors of the field in all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tumult of the fight; but when the spoil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is shared, the largest share of all is thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I, content with little, seek my ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weary with combat. I shall now go home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Phthia; better were it to return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my beaked ships; but here, where I am held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In little honor, thou wilt fail, I think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gather, in large measure, spoil and wealth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Him answered Agamemnon, king of men:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Desert, then, if thou wilt; I ask thee not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stay for me; there will be others left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do me honor yet, and, best of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The all-providing Jove is with me still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee I detest the most of all the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ordained by him to govern; thy delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in contention, war, and bloody frays.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou art brave, some deity, no doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath thus endowed thee. Hence, then, to thy home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all thy ships and men! there domineer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over thy Myrmidons; I heed thee not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor care I for thy fury. Thus, in turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I threaten thee; since Phoebus takes away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chryseis, I will send her in my ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with my friends, and, coming to thy tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will bear away the fair-cheeked maid, thy prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Briseis, that thou learn how far I stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above thee, and that other chiefs may fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To measure strength with me, and brave my power.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The rage of Peleus’ son, as thus he spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew fiercer; in that shaggy breast his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took counsel, whether from his thigh to draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trenchant sword, and, thrusting back the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smite down Atrides, or subdue his wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And master his own spirit. While he thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Debated with himself, and half unsheathed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ponderous blade, Pallas Athene came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent from on high by Juno, the white-armed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who loved both warriors and made both her care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She came behind him, seen by him alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plucked his yellow hair. The hero turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wonder, and at once he knew the look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pallas and the awful-gleaming eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus accosted her with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why com’st thou hither, daughter of the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bears the aegis? Art thou here to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The insolence of Agamemnon, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus? Let me tell thee what I deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be the event. That man may lose his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quickly too, for arrogance like this.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thus the goddess, blue-eyed Pallas, spake:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I came from heaven to pacify thy wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou wilt heed my counsel. I am sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Juno the white-armed, to whom ye both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are dear, who ever watches o’er you both.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refrain from violence; let not thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unsheathe the sword, but utter with thy tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reproaches, as occasion may arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I declare what time shall bring to pass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threefold amends shall yet be offered thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In gifts of princely cost, for this day’s wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now calm thy angry spirit, and obey.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Achilles, the swift-footed, answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O goddess, be the word thou bring’st obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However fierce my anger; for to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hearkens to the gods, the gods give ear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So speaking, on the silver hilt he stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His strong right hand, and back into its sheath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrust his good sword, obeying. She, meantime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returned to heaven, where aegis-bearing Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwells with the other gods. And now again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides, with opprobrious words, bespake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Atreus, venting thus his wrath:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wine-bibber, with the forehead of a dog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a deer’s heart! Thou never yet hast dared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To arm thyself for battle with the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor join the other chiefs prepared to lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ambush⁠—such thy craven fear of death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better it suits thee, midst the mighty host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greeks, to rob some warrior of his prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dares withstand thee. King thou art, and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devourer of thy people. Thou dost rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spiritless race, else this day’s insolence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides, were thy last. And now I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bind my saying with a mighty oath:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By this my sceptre, which can never bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A leaf or twig, since first it left its stem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the mountains⁠—for the steel has pared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its boughs and bark away, to sprout no more⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the Achaian judges bear it⁠—they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who guard the laws received from Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such is my oath⁠—the time shall come when all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks shall long to see Achilles back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While multitudes are perishing by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector, the man-queller; thou, meanwhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though thou lament, shalt have no power to help,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shalt rage against thyself to think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou hast scorned the bravest of the Greeks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he spake, Pelides to the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flung the gold-studded wand, and took his seat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fiercely Atrides raged; but now uprose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nestor, the master of persuasive speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clear-toned Pylian orato, whose tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dropped words more sweet than honey. He had seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two generations that grew up and lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With him on sacred Pylos pass away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he ruled the third. With prudent words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thus addressed the assembly of the chiefs:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye gods! what new misfortunes threaten Greece!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How Priam would exult and Priam’s sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how would all the Trojan race rejoice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were they to know how furiously ye strive⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye who in council and in fight surpass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other Greeks. Now hearken to my words⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye who are younger than myself⁠—for I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have lived with braver men than you, and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They held me not in light esteem. Such men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never saw, nor shall I see again⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men like Pirithoüs and like Druas, lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of nations, Caeneus and Exadius,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the great Polypheme, and Theseus, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aegeus, likest to the immortal gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strongest of all the earth-born race they fought⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strongest with the strongest of their time⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Centaurs, the wild dwellers of the hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fearfully destroyed them. With these men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did I hold converse, coming to their camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Pylos in a distant land. They sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bid me join the war, and by their side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fought my best, but no man living now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the wide earth would dare to fight with them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great as they were, they listened to my words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took my counsel. Hearken also ye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let my words persuade you for the best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, powerful as thou art, take not from him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maiden; suffer him to keep the prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decreed him by the sons of Greece; and thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides, strive no longer with the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since never Jove on sceptred prince bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like eminence to his. Though braver thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And goddess-born, yet hath he greater power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wider sway. Atrides, calm thy wrath⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis I who ask⁠—against the chief who stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bulwark of the Greeks in this fierce war.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To him the sovereign Agamemnon said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The things which thou hast uttered, aged chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are fitly spoken; but this man would stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above all others; he aspires to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The master, over all to domineer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to direct in all things; yet, I think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There may be one who will not suffer this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if by favor of the immortal gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was made brave, have they for such a cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given him the liberty of insolent speech?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hereat the great Achilles, breaking in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered: “Yea, well might I deserve the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of coward and of wretch, should I submit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all things to thy bidding. Such commands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay thou on others, not on me; nor think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall obey thee longer. This I say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear it well in mind⁠—I shall not lift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My hand to keep the maiden whom ye gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now take from me; but whatever else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be on board that swift black ship of mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beware thou carry not away the least</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without my leave. Come, make the trial now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That these may see thy black blood bathe my spear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, rising from that strife of words, the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dissolved the assembly at the Grecian fleet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides to his tents and well manned ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went with Patroclus and his warrior friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Agamemnon bade upon the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Launch a swift bark with twenty chosen men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ply the oar, and put a hecatomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon it for the god. He thither led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-cheeked maid Chryseis; the command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave to wise Ulysses; forth they went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leader and crew, upon their watery path.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile, he bade the camp be purified;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straight the warriors purified the camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, casting the pollutions to the waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They burned to Phoebus chosen hecatombs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bulls and goats beside the barren main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which the savor rose in smoke to heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So was the host employed. But not the less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Agamemnon persevere to urge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His quarrel with Pelides; and he thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Addressed Talthybius and Eurybates.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heralds and his faithful ministers:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Go ye to where Achilles holds his tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take the fair Briseis by the hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bring her hither. If he yield her not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall come forth to claim her with a band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of warriors, and it shall be worse for him.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and sent them forth with added words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of menace. With unwilling steps they went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the barren deep, until they reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tents and vessels of the Myrmidons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And found Achilles seated by his tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his black ship; their coming pleased him not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They, moved by fear and reverence of the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stopped, and bespake him not, nor signified</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their errand; he perceived their thought and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hail, heralds, messengers of Jove and men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw near; I blame you not. I only blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides, who hath sent you for the maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noble Patroclus I bring the damsel forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let them lead her hence. My witnesses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are ye, before the blessed deities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mortal men, and this remorseless king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ever he shall need me to avert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doom of utter ruin from his host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most sure it is, he madly yields himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fatal counsels, thoughtless of the past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the future, nor forecasting how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks may fight, unvanquished, by their fleet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. Meantime Patroclus had obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The word of his beloved friend. He brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-cheeked maid Briseis from the tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she was led away. The messengers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returned to where their barks were moored, and she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwillingly went with them. Then in tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, from his friends withdrawing, sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the hoary ocean-marge, and gazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the black deep beyond, and stretched his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prayed to his dear mother, earnestly:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Mother! since thou didst bring me forth to dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brief space on earth, Olympian Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who thunders in the highest, should have filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That space with honors, but he grants them not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide-ruling Agamemnon takes and holds us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prize I won, and thus dishonors me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus, shedding tears, he spake. His mother heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sitting within the ocean deeps, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her aged father. Swiftly from the waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the gray deep emerging like a cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sat before him as he wept, and smoothed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brow with her soft hand, and kindly said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My child, why weepest thou? What grief is this?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Speak, and hide nothing, so that both may know.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, swift of foot, sighed heavily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said: “Thou know’st already. Why relate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These things to thee, who art apprised of all?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“To Thebè, to Eëtion’s sacred town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We marched, and plundered it, and hither brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The booty, which was fairly shared among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of Greece, and Agamemnon took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-cheeked maid Chryseis as his prize.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Chryses, priest of Phoebus, to the fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Achaian warriors, brazen-mailed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came, to redeem his daughter, offering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ransom uncounted. In his hand he bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fillets of Apollo, archer-god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the golden sceptre, and he sued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the Greeks, but chiefly to the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus, the two leaders of the host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then all the other chiefs, applauding, bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revere the priest and take the liberal gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He offered; but the counsel did not please</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides Agamemnon: he dismissed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The priest with scorn, and added threatening words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged man indignantly withdrew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Phoebus⁠—for the priest was dear to him⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Granted his prayer and sent among the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A deadly shaft. The people of the camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were perishing in heaps. His arrows flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Grecian army, far and wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A seer expert in oracles revealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The will of Phoebus, and I was the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To counsel that the god should be appeased.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Agamemnon rose in sudden wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uttering a threat, which he has since fulfilled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the dark-eyed Greeks are taking back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His child to Chryses, and with her they bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gifts to the monarch-god; while to my tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heralds have come, and borne away the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Briseis, given me by the sons of Greece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But succor thou thy son, if thou hast power;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ascend to heaven and bring thy prayer to Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If e’er by word or act thou gav’st him aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I remember, in my father’s halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I often heard thee, glorying, tell how thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone of all the gods, didst interpose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To save the cloud-compeller, Saturn’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From shameful overthrow, when all the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dwell upon Olympus had conspired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bind him⁠—Juno, Neptune, and with them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pallas Athene. Thou didst come and loose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bonds, and call up to the Olympian heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hundred-handed, whom the immortal gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have named Briareus, but the sons of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aegeon, mightier than his sire in strength;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he, rejoicing in the honor, took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His seat by Jove, and all the immortals shrank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aghast before him, and let fall the chains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remind him of all this, and, sitting down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embrace his knees, and pray him to befriend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans, that the Greeks, hemmed in and slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside their ships and by the shore, may learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To glory in their king, and even he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide-ruling Agamemnon, may perceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How grievous was his folly when he dared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To treat with scorn the bravest of the Greeks.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Thetis answered, weeping as she spake:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Alas, my son, why did I rear thee, born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sorrow as thou wert? O would that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwronged, and with no cause for tears, couldst dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside thy ships, since thou must die so soon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I brought thee forth in an unhappy hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Short-lived and wronged beyond all other men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet will I climb the Olympian height among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its snows and make my suit to Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Thunderer, if haply he may yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my entreaties. Thou, meanwhile, abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thy swift ships, incensed against the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take no part in all their battles more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yesterday did Jove depart to hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A banquet far in Ocean’s realm, among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blameless Ethiopians, and with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went all the train of gods. Twelve days must pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere he return to heaven, and I will then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter his brazen palace, clasp his knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hope to move his purpose by my prayers.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So saying, she departed, leaving him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In anger for the shapely damsel’s sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom forcibly they took away. Meantime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, with the sacred hecatomb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrived at Chrysa. Entering the deep port,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They folded up the sails and laid them down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the black ship, and lowering the mast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all its shrouds, they brought it to its place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then to the shore they urged the bark with oars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast the anchors and secured the prow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fastenings. Next, they disembarked and stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the beach and placed the hecatomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sight of Phoebus, the great archer. Last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chryseis left the deck, and, leading her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the altar, wise Ulysses gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maid to her dear father, speaking thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Chryses! Agamemnon, king of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sends me in haste to bring this maid to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And offer up this hallowed hecatomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Phoebus, for the Greeks: that so the god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose wrath afflicts us sore, may be appeased.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So speaking, to her father’s hands he gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maiden; joyfully the priest received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The child he loved. Then did the Greeks array</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble hecatomb in order round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sculptured altar, and with washen hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They took the salted meal, while Chryses stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spread abroad his hands and prayed aloud:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear me, thou bearer of the glittering bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who guardest Chrysa and the pleasant isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Cilia and art lord in Tenedos!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already hast thou listened to my prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And honored me, and terribly hast scourged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaian people. Hear me yet again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cause the plague that wastes the Greeks to cease.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, supplicating, and to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus Apollo hearkened. When the prayers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were ended, and the salted meal was flung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Backward they turned the necks of the fat beeves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cut their throats, and flayed the carcasses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hewed away the thighs, and covered them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With caul in double folds; and over this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They laid raw fragments of the other parts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er all the aged priest poured dark red wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And burned them on dry wood. A band of youths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With five-pronged spits, beside him, thrust these through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The entrails, which they laid among the flames.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the thighs were all consumed, and next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The entrails tasted, all the rest was carved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into small portions and transfixed with spits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roasted with nice care and then withdrawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the hot coals. This task performed, they made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The banquet ready. All became its guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all were welcome to the equal feast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when their thirst and hunger were allayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boys crowned the ample urns with wreaths, and served</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wine to all, and poured libations forth. Meantime the</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Argive youths, that whole day long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang to appease the god; they chanted forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High anthems to the archer of the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He listened to the strain, and his stern mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was softened. When, at length, the sun went down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And darkness fell, they gave themselves to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the fastenings of their ships, and when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared the rosy-fingered Dawn, the child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Morning, they returned to the great host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Achaians. Phoebus deigned to send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A favoring breeze; at once they reared the mast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And opened the white sails; the canvas swelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the wind, and hoarsely round the keel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark waves murmured as the ship flew on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So ran she, cutting through the sea her way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when they reached the great Achaian host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They drew their vessel high upon the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the sands, and underneath its sides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They laid long beams to prop the keel, and straight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dispersed themselves among the tents and ships.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The goddess-born Achilles, swift of foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside his ships still brooded o’er his wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor came to council with the illustrious chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor to the war, but suffered idleness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To eat his heart away; for well he loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clamor and combat. But when now, at length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The twelfth day came, the ever-living gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returned together to the Olympian mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Jove, their leader. Thetis kept in mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her son’s desire, and, with the early morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Emerging from the depths of ocean, climbed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the great heaven and the high mount, and found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All-seeing Jove, who, from the rest apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was seated on the loftiest pinnacle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many-peaked Olympus. She sat down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the son of Saturn, clasped his knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her left arm, and lifted up her right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In supplication to the Sovereign One:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Jupiter, my father, if among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The immortals I have ever given thee aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By word or act, deny not my request.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honor my son, whose life is doomed to end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So soon; for Agamemnon, king of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath done him shameful wrong: he takes from him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keeps the prize he won in war. But thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Olympian Jupiter, supremely wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honor him thou, and give the Trojan host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victory, until the humbled Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heap large increase of honors on my son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, but cloud-compelling Jupiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered her not; in silence long he sat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Thetis, who had clasped his knees at first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clung to them still, and prayed him yet again:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O promise me, and grant my suit; or else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deny it⁠—for thou need’st not fear⁠—and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall know how far below the other gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou holdest me in honor.” As she spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cloud-compeller, sighing heavily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered her thus: “Hard things dost thou require,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou wilt force me into new disputes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Juno, who will anger me again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With contumelious words; for ever thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In presence of the immortals, doth she seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cause of contention, charging that I aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans in their battles. Now depart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let her not perceive thee. Leave the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be by me accomplished; and that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mayst be assured, behold, I give the nod;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this, with me, the immortals know, portends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The highest certainty: no word of mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which once my nod confirms can be revoked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or prove untrue, or fail to be fulfilled.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he spake, the son of Saturn gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nod with his dark brows. The ambrosial curls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the Sovereign One’s immortal head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were shaken, and with them the mighty mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Olympus trembled. Then they parted, she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunging from bright Olympus to the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Jove returning to his palace home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where all the gods, uprising from their thrones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At sight of the Great Father, waited not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his approach, but met him as he came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now upon his throne the Godhead took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His seat, but Juno knew⁠—for she had seen⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Thetis of the silver feet, and child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the gray Ancient of the Deep, had held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close council with her consort. Therefore she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bespake the son of Saturn harshly, thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O crafty one, with whom, among the gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plottest thou now? Thus hath it ever been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy pleasure to devise, apart from me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy plans in secret; never willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost thou reveal to me thy purposes.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thus replied the Father of the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mortals: “Juno, do not think to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All my designs, for thou wilt find the task</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too hard for thee, although thou be my spouse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What fitting is to be revealed, no one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the immortals or of men shall know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sooner than thou; but when I form designs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart from all the gods, presume thou not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To question me or pry into my plans.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Juno, the large-eyed and august, rejoined:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What words, stern son of Saturn, hast thou said!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It never was my wont to question thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or pry into thy plans, and thou art left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To form them as thou wilt; yet now I fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver-footed Thetis has contrived⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That daughter of the Ancient of the Deep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To o’erpersuade thee, for, at early prime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sat before thee and embraced thy knees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou hast promised her, I cannot doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give Achilles honor and to cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myriads of Greeks to perish by their fleet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Jove, the cloud-compeller, spake again:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Harsh-tongued! thou ever dost suspect me thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor can I act unwatched; and yet all this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Profits thee nothing, for it only serves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To breed dislike, and is the worse for thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But were it as thou deemest, ’tis enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That such has been my pleasure. Sit thou down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silence, and obey, lest all the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Olympus, when I come and lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These potent hands on thee, protect thee not.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Juno, large-eyed and august,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erawed, and curbing her high spirit, sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silence; meanwhile all the gods of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the halls of Jove were inly grieved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Vulcan, the renowned artificer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought to console his mother in her grief⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white-armed Juno⁠—and thus interposed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Great will the evil be and hard to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If, for the sake of mortals, ye are moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To such contention and the assembled gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disturbed with discord. Even the pleasant feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will lose its flavor when embittered thus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let me warn my mother while I speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise as she is, that she defer to Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest the All-Father angrily again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reply, and spoil the banquet of the day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Thunderer of Olympus, if he choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make a wreck of all things, wields a power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far greater than we all. Accost him thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gentle speeches, and the Lord of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will then regard us in a kindly mood.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus he spake, he gave into the hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his beloved mother the round cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of double form, and thus he spake again:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Mother, be patient and submit, although</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sadness, lest these eyes behold thee yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beaten with stripes, and though I hold thee dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grieve for thee, I cannot bring thee help;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hard it is to strive with Jupiter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already once, when I took part with thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seized me by the foot and flung me o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battlements of heaven. All day I fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the setting sun I struck the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Lemnos. Little life was left in me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time the Sintians took me from the ground.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Juno, the white-shouldered, smiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smiling took the cup her son had brought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And next he poured to all the other gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet nectar from the jar, beginning first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With those at the right hand. As they beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lame Vulcan laboring o’er the palace-floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An inextinguishable laughter broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all the blessed gods. So feasted they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day till sunset. From that equal feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None stood aloof, nor from the pleasant sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of harp, which Phoebus touched, nor from the voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Muses singing sweetly in their turn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when the sun’s all-glorious light was down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each to his sleeping-place betook himself;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Vulcan, the lame god, with marvellous art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had framed for each the chamber of his rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Jupiter, the Olympian Thunderer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went also to his couch, where ’twas his wont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When slumber overtook him, to recline.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, beside him, slept the white-armed queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Juno, the mistress of the golden throne.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
