<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 10: The Night-Adventure of Diomed and Ulysses</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-10" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Night-Adventure of Diomed and Ulysses</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Agamemnon’s distress at the obstinacy of Achilles⁠—Consults with Menelaus, Nestor, Ulysses, and Diomed⁠—A council⁠—Diomed and Ulysses set out for the enemy’s camp to learn his designs⁠—Death of Dolon, the Trojan Spy⁠—Rhesus the Thracian killed in his tent and his horses taken.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>All the night long the captains of the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slept at the ships, and pleasant was their sleep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save only Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd of the people. Not to him⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vexed with a thousand cares⁠—came gentle sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when the husband of the light-haired queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heaven sends forth his thunders, ushering in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some wide-involving shower⁠—rain, hail, or snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whitening the fields⁠—or opening o’er some land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ravenous jaws of unrelenting war⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So frequent were the groans which from his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides uttered; for within his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart was troubled. Looking toward the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy, he wondered at the many fires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blazing before the city, and the sound is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of flutes and fifes, and tumult of the crowd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when he turned him toward the fleet and host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greece, he tore his hair, and flung it up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Jove, and vented his great heart in groans.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now at length it seemed to him most wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seek Neleian Nestor, and with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devise some plan by which to turn aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The threatened evil from the Greeks. He rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drew his tunic o’er his breast, and laced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The graceful sandals to his well-shaped feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er his shoulders threw the blood-stained hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a huge tawny lion, that reached down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to the ground; and took in hand his spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime with like uneasy thoughts oppressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Menelaus, to whose eyes there came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No slumber⁠—dreading lest calamity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should light upon the Greeks, who for his sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had crossed the sea to carry war to Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And first he threw a leopard’s spotted hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er his broad back, and placed the brazen helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his head, and took in his strong grasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spear, and went to bid his brother wake⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother, the chief ruler over all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men of Greece, and honored like a god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He found him at his galley’s prow in act</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sheath his shoulders in the shining mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pleased to greet his coming. To the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Menelaus, great in battle, spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why arm thyself, my brother? Wouldst thou send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A warrior to explore the Trojan camp?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None will accept the task, I fear, to creep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone at dead of night, a spy, within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hostile lines;⁠—a bold man must he be.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then answered Agamemnon, king of men:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Most noble Menelaus, much we need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise counsel⁠—thou and I⁠—to save our men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And galleys from destruction, since the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove is changed. Now hath the God respect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hector’s sacrifices; for in truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never saw⁠—I never heard of one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in one day performed such mighty deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Hector, dear to Jove, just now hath wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though not the son of goddess or of god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those deeds will be, I deem, for many a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cause of bitter sorrow to the Greeks⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such evil hath he wrought. Now go at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from their galleys call Idomeneus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ajax; while to noble Nestor’s tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go, and pray that he will rise and give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their orders to the sacred band of guards;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they will hearken to him, since his son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commands them jointly with Meriones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The armor-bearer of Idomeneus⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both named by us to that important trust.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Menelaus, great in battle, said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What wilt thou, then, and what dost thou command⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I remain with them until thou come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, having given the message, seek thee here?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again the monarch Agamemnon spake:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wait there, lest as we go I meet thee not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many ways are through the camp. But thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In going, shout aloud and bid them all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be vigilant, accosting every one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his paternal name, and giving each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due honor: bear thyself not haughtily:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We too must labor; for when we were born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove laid this hard condition on us all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, and, dismissing with that charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother, hastened to where Nestor lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherd of his people. Him he found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his soft couch within his tent beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dark-brown ship. Around him scattered shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arms⁠—a shield, two spears, a gleaming helm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pliant belt, with which the ancient man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girded himself when arming to lead on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His men to murderous fight;⁠—for not to age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warrior yielded yet. He raised his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, leaning on his elbow, questioned thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides: “Who art thou that traversest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The camp beside the fleet at dead of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, while others sleep? Com’st thou to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the guardsmen, or a comrade? Speak;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come not in silence thus: what wouldst thou have?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then answered Agamemnon, king of men:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Nestor, son of Neleus, whom the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All glory in! thou certainly wilt know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides Agamemnon, whom the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove hath visited with hardships great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond what others bear, to last while breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in my lungs, and while my knees can move.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wander thus abroad because sweet sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes not to close my eyelids, and the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slaughter of the Greeks distress me sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For them I greatly fear, my heart is faint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mind confounded. In my breast the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pants, and my limbs all tremble. If thou wilt⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, as I see, thou also dost not sleep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come with me to the guards, that we may know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether, o’ercome by toil and weariness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They give themselves to slumber and forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their watch. The foe is near us in his camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how know we that even now by night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He plans not, to attack us in our tents?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Nestor, the Gerenian knight, replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Atrides Agamemnon, glorious king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men, almighty Jove will not perform</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Hector all that Hector plans and hopes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heavier cares, I think, will yet be his</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When once Achilles’ wrath is turned away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet willingly I join thee. Let us call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other chiefs⁠—Ulysses, Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both mighty spearmen; Ajax, swift of foot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the brave son of Phyleus. It were well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To send and bid the mightier Ajax come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And King Idomeneus, for farthest off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ships of both are stationed. I shall chide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy brother Menelaus⁠—though he be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honored and dear, and though it please thee not⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sleeping, while he leaves such toils as these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee alone. He should be here among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chiefs, exhorting them to valiant deeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now the hour of bitter need is come.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again spake Agamemnon, king of men:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“At other times, old chief, I would have begged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou shouldst blame him: he is oft remiss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And late to act; but not because of sloth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or want of spirit, but he looks to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waits for my example. Yet tonight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rose before me, sought me, and is sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To call the chiefs whom thou hast named; and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us go on, and meet them where they wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the guards and just before the gates⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I appointed that the trysting-place.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Nestor, the Gerenian knight, replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Then let no Greek condemn him, or refuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To heed and to obey when he shall speak.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and drew his tunic o’er his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laced the fair sandals to his shapely feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round him fastened, with a clasp, his cloak⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A double web of purple, with full folds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flowing pile. He grasped a massive spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its blade of trenchant brass. And first he sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The galleys of the Achaians brazen-mailed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There shouted Nestor the Gerenian knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To raise Ulysses, best of counsellors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove-like in wisdom; who perceived the voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And issued from his tent in haste, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What brings you forth to walk the camp at night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the ships alone; what urgent cause?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then answered Nestor, the Gerenian knight:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Son of Laertes, nobly born, and skilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wise devices, be thou not displeased:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fearful woe impends above the Greeks:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, then, and call the other chiefs, to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their counsel whether we shall flee or fight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and wise Ulysses, entering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tent again, upon his shoulders laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His well-wrought shield, and joined them as they went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, coming to Tydides Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They found him by his tent among his arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrades sleeping round him with their shields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath their heads. Their spears were set upright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nether points in earth. The polished brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleamed like the lightnings of All-Father Jove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sleep the hero lay; a wild bull’s hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was spread beneath him, and a carpet dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With glowing colors propped his head. The knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gerenian Nestor, touched him with his foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roused him, and addressed him chidingly:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O son of Tydeus! wilt thou calmly sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the night long? And hast thou, then, not heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That on a height amidst the plain the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy are stationed, near the ships, and small</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The space that parts the enemy’s camp from ours?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. The son of Tydeus sprang from sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once, and answered him with wingèd words:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thy labors are too constant, aged man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shrinkest from no hardship. Are there not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young men among the Greeks to walk the camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And call the kings? Thou never takest rest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Nestor, the Gerenian knight, replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well hast thou said, my friend, for I have sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without reproach, and I have many troops;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And any one of these might walk the camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give the summons. But tonight there lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hard necessity upon the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their destruction and their rescue hang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balanced on a knife’s edge. Come then, since thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art younger, call swift Ajax and the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phyleus, if thou wouldst relieve my age.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and Diomed around him flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tawny lion’s ample hide, that reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to his feet, and took his spear and went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And summoned the two kings, and brought them forth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now when they came among the assembled guard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its leaders were not slumbering; every man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat watchful and in arms. As dogs that guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flocks in a sheepfold hear some savage beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That comes through thickets down the mountainside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud is the clamor of the dogs and men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sleep is frightened thence⁠—so gentle sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fled from the eyes of those who watched, that night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sadly, with eyes turned ever toward the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Intently listening for the foe’s approach.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aged Nestor saw them, and rejoiced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus encouraged them with wingèd words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Watch thus, dear youths, let no one yield to sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest we become the mockery of the foe.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and crossed the trench; and with him went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Grecian leaders, they who had been called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To council. With them went Meriones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Nestor’s eminent son, for they had both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been summoned. Crossing to the other side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that deep trench, they found an open space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear of the dead, in which they sat them down⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just where the fiery Hector, having slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many Achaians, turned him back when night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came o’er him. There they sat to hold debate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus spake Nestor the Gerenian knight:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Friends! is there none among you who so far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trusts his own valor that he will tonight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Venture among the Trojans? He perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might capture on the borders of the camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some foeman wandering, or might bring report</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what they meditate, and whether still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They mean to keep their station far from Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And near our ships, or, since their late success,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return to Ilium. Could he safely bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This knowledge back to us, his meed were great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glory among all men beneath the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And liberal recompense. As many chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As now command our galleys, each would give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A black ewe with a suckling lamb⁠—such gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one hath yet received⁠—and he should sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A guest at all our banquets and our feasts.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and all were silent for a space.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Diomed, the great in battle, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nestor, my resolute spirit urges me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To explore the Trojan camp, that lies so near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, were another warrior by my side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should go forth with a far surer hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And greater were my daring. For when two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Join in the same adventure, one perceives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the other how they ought to act;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While one alone, however prompt, resolves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More tardily and with a weaker will.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and many a chief made suit to share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The risk with Diomed. The ministers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mars, the chieftains Ajax, asked to go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meriones desired it; Nestor’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greatly desired to join the enterprise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides Menelaus, skilled to wield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear, desired it; and that hardy chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses, longed to explore the Trojan camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For full of daring aims was the great soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his bosom. Agamemnon then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king of men, took up the word and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Tydides Diomed, most dear of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choose from the many chiefs, who ask to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A part with thee, the bravest. Be not moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By deference to take the worse and leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The abler warrior. Pay no heed to rank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or race, or wide extent of kingly rule.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus spake the king; for in his heart he feared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fair-haired Menelaus. Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great in battle, then addressed them all:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye bid me choose: how, then, can I o’erlook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Godlike Ulysses, prudent in resolve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And firm in every danger, well beloved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Pallas. Give me him, and our return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is sure, though from consuming flames; for he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is wise to plan beyond all other men.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ulysses, nobly born and hardy, spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turn: “Tydides, praise me not too much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor blame me, for thou speakest to the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who know me. Meantime let us haste to go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the night wears away, and morn is near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stars are high, two thirds of night are past⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greater part⁠—and scarce a third remains.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and both arrayed themselves for fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty warrior Thrasymedes gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The two-edged sword he wore to Diomed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose own was at the galleys⁠—and a shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero then put on his helmet, made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of tough bull-hide, with neither cone nor crest⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as is worn by beardless youths. A bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quiver, and sword Meriones bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Ulysses, placing on his brows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A leathern helmet, firmly laced within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By many a thong, and on the outer side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set thickly with a tusky boar’s white teeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which fenced it well and skilfully. A web</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of woollen for the temples lined the work.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This helm Autolycus once bore away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Eleon, the city where he sacked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stately palace of Amyntor, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ormenus. The captor gave the prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Cytheran chief, Amphidamas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bore it to Scandeia, and in turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestowed it upon Molus as his guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Molus gave it to Meriones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His son, to wear in battle. Now at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It crowned Ulysses’ temples. When the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were all accoutred in their dreadful arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forward they went, and left the assembled chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, sent by Pallas forth, upon their right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heron flew beside their path. The bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They saw not, for the night was dark, but heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its rustling wings. Ulysses at the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoiced, and supplicated Pallas thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear! daughter of the Aegis-bearer Jove!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou who art near me in all dangers, thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose eye is on me wheresoe’er I go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Befriend me, Pallas, yet again, and grant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, laden with great glory, we return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe to the galleys, mighty deeds performed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And woe inflicted on the Trojan race.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next Diomed, the great in battle, prayed:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Daughter invincible of Jove, give ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Also to me. Be with me now, as once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou didst attend on Tydeus nobly born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father, when he bore an embassy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thebè from the Achaians. He beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Asopus left the Achaians mailed in brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore a friendly message to the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Cadmus, and on his return performed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a mighty deed with aid from thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great goddess! for thou stoodest by his side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand now by me; be thou my shield and guard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I, in turn, will offer up to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A yearling heifer, broad between the horns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which never ploughman yet hath tamed to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yoke. Her to thine altar will I bring, With gilded horns, to be a sacrifice.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So prayed they. Pallas listened to their prayers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, having supplicated thus the child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove Almighty, the two chiefs went on Like lions through the darkness of the night, Through slaughter, heaps of corses, and black blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor now had Hector suffered the brave sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Troy to sleep, but summoned all the chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaders, and princes of the host, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Addressed the assembly with well-ordered words:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Who of you all will promise to perform</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The task I set him, for a large reward?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ample shall his meed be. I will give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A chariot and two steeds with lofty necks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swifter than the swift galleys of the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great glory will be his whoever dares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approach those ships and bring the knowledge thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether the fleet is guarded as before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whether, yielding to our arms, the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is meditating flight, and, through the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ercome with weariness, keeps watch no more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and all were silent for a space.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now there was one, among the Trojan chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose father was Eumedes, of the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of reverend heralds. Dolon was his name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he was rich in gold and brass, deformed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In face but swift of foot, an only son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among five sisters. He stood forth among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojans, and replied to Hector thus:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My daring spirit, Hector, urges me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To visit the swift ships and learn the state</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Greek host. But hold thy sceptre forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And solemnly attest the gods that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt give to me the horses, and the car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Engrailed with brass, which bear the illustrious son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus. I shall not explore in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor balk thy hope of me; for I will pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the camp until I reach the ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Agamemnon, where the chiefs are now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Debating whether they shall fly or fight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and Hector held the sceptre forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swore: “Be Jupiter the Thunderer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Husband of Juno, witness, that those steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall bear no other Trojan than thyself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That honor I confirm to thee alone.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. It was an idle oath, yet gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New courage to the spy, who instantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his shoulders hung his crooked bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round him flung a gray wolf’s hide, and placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A casque of otter-skin upon his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took his pointed javelin, and made haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reach the Grecian fleet. Yet was he doomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never to leave that fleet again, nor bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tidings to Hector. Soon was he beyond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crowd of men and steeds, and eagerly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held on his way. Ulysses first perceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His coming, and thus spake to Diomed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Some one, Tydides, from the enemy’s camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is coming, either as a spy, or else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spoil the dead. First let us suffer him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pass us by a little on the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let us rush and seize him. Should his speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be greater than our own, let us attack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fugitive with spears, and drive him on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where our ships are lying, from his camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest, flying townward, he escape our hands.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and both lay down without the path.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the dead, while he unwarily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed by them. When he now had gone as far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As two yoked mules might at the furrow’s end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Precede a pair of oxen⁠—for by mules</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plough is drawn more quickly through the soil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the deep fallow⁠—then they rose, and rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seize him. As he heard their steps he stopped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hope that his companions had been sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Troy by Hector to conduct him back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when they came within a javelin’s cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or haply less, he saw that they were foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moved his nimble knees, and turned to flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While rapidly they followed. As two hounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharp-toothed, and trained to track their prey, pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through forest-grounds some fawn or hare that runs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before them panting, so did Diomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And terrible Ulysses without stop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow the fugitive, to cut him off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his own people. In his flight he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where soon he would have mingled with the guards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to the fleet. Then Pallas breathed new strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into Tydides, that no other Greek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might boast that he had wounded Dolon first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And steal the honor. Therefore, with his spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uplifted, Diomed rushed on and spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stop, or my spear o’ertakes thee, nor wilt thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escape a certain death from this right hand.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and hurled his spear⁠—but not to smite⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Dolon, over whose right shoulder passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The polished weapon, and, descending, pierced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ground. Then Dolon, pale and fear-struck, stopped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quaked, with chattering teeth and stammering speech.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They, breathless with the chase, came up and seized</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands, while, bursting into tears, he spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Take me alive, and ye shall have from me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ransom: there is store of brass and gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well-wrought steel, of which a princely share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father will bestow when he shall hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of me alive and at the Grecian fleet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The crafty chief Ulysses answered thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Take heart, and cease to think of death, but tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And truly, why thou camest to our fleet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was it to strip the bodies of the dead?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Camest thou, sent by Hector, as a spy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among our ships, or of thine own accord?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Dolon answered, trembling still with fear:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hector, against my will and to my hurt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Persuaded me. He promised to bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On me the firm-paced coursers, and the car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Engrailed with brass, which bear the illustrious son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Peleus, and enjoined me by the aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of darkness to approach the foe and learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether ye guard your galleys as before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, overcome by us, consult on flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, wearied with the hardships of the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have failed to set the accustomed nightly watch.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The man of craft, Ulysses, smiled, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Truly, thy hope was set on princely gifts⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The steeds of war-renowned Aeacides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard to be reined by mortal hands, or driven as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By any, save by Peleus’ son himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom an immortal mother bore. But come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me⁠—and tell the truth⁠—where hast thou left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector, the leader of the host, and where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are laid his warlike arms; where stand his steeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where are the sentinels, and where the tents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of other chiefs? On what do they consult?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will they remain beside our galleys here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or do they meditate, since, as they say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks are beaten, a return to Troy?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dolon, Eumedes’ son, made answer thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What thou requirest I will truly tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector is with his counsellors, and now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart from all the bustle, at the tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ilus the divine, he plans the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sentries, of whom thou speakest, there are none;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No chosen band, O hero! has in charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guard the camp. By all their blazing fires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Constrained by need, the Trojans keep awake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each exhorts his fellow to maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The watch: not so the auxiliar troops who came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From far: they sleep, and since they have no wives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor children near, they let the Trojans watch.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thus the man of wiles, Ulysses, spake:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“How sleep they⁠—mingled with the knights of Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or by themselves? Tell me, that I may know.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dolon, Eumedes’ son, made answer thus:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What thou requirest I will truly tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one hand, toward the sea, the bowmen lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Caria and Paeonia, and with them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lelegans, Caucons, and the gallant tribe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Pelasgians. On the other hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward Thymbra, are the Lycians, the proud race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mysia, Phrygia’s knights, and cavalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Maeonians. Why should ye inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The place of each? If ye design tonight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To penetrate into the Trojan camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are the Thracians, newly come, apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all the others: with them is their king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rhesus, the son of Eioneus; his steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are far the largest and most beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ever saw⁠—the snow is not so white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind is not so swift. His chariot shines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gold and silver, and the coat of mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which he came to Troy is all of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gloriously and marvellously bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as becomes not mortal men to wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the gods only. Now to your swift Ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead me; or bind me fast with thongs, and here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave me till your return; and ye shall know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether the words I speak be true or false.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then sternly spake the gallant Diomed:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Once in our hands a prisoner, do not think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Dolon! to escape, though thou hast told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Things that shall profit us. For if we now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Release thee thou wilt surely come again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Greek fleet, a spy, or openly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fight against us. If I take thy life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’T is certain thou wilt harm the Greeks no more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. And as the suppliant took his chin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his large hand, and had begun a prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He smote him with his sword at the mid-neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cut the tendons both; the severed head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet he spake, fell, rolling in the dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then they took his helm of otter-skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wolf’s-hide, sounding bow, and massive spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobly born Ulysses in his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifted the trophies high, devoting them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Pallas, deity of spoil, and prayed:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Delight thyself, O goddess, in these arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thee we first invoke, of all the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Olympus. Guide us now to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The camp and coursers of the sons of Thrace.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake; and, raising them aloft, he hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spoils upon a tamarisk, and brake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reeds and the spreading branches of the tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To form a mark, that so on their return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They might not, in the darkness, miss the spot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then onward, mid strewn arms and pools of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They went, and soon were where the Thracians lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There slept the warriors, overpowered with toil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their glittering arms were near them, fairly ranged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In triple rows, and by each suit of arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two coursers. Rhesus slumbered in the midst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near him were his fleet horses, which were made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast to the chariot’s border by the reins.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses saw them first, and, pointing, said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This is the man, O Diomed, and these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The steeds, described by Dolon whom we slew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, then; put forth thy strength of arm, for ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth it become thee to stand idle here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed as thou art. Loose thou the steeds; or else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slay thou the men, and leave the steeds to me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake. The blue-eyed Pallas straightway gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strength to Tydides, who on every side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dealt slaughter. From the smitten by the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose fearful groans; the ground was red with blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a ravening lion suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Springs on a helpless flock of goats or sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fell Tydides on the Thracian band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till twelve were slain. Whomever Diomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approached and smote, the sage Ulysses seized,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drew him backward by the feet, that thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flowing-maned coursers might pass forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhindered, nor, by treading on the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be startled; for they yet were new to war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now when the son of Tydeus reached the king⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thirteenth of his victims⁠—him he slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he breathed heavily; for on that night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fearful dream, in shape Oenides’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood o’er him, sent by Pallas. Carefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses meantime loosed the firm-paced steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, fastening them together, drave them forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Urging them with his bow: he had not thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take the showy lash that lay in sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fair chariot-seat. In going thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He whistled, as a sign to Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who lingered, pondering on his next exploit⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether to seize the chariot where was laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The embroidered armor, dragging it away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, lifting it aloft, to bear it thence;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or take more Thracian lives. As thus his thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were busy, Pallas, standing near him, spake:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O son of large-souled Tydeus, think betimes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy return to where the galleys lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else may some god arouse the sons of Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou be forced to reach the ships by flight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake. He knew the goddess by her voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaped upon a steed. Ulysses lashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horses with his bow, and on they flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward the swift galleys of the Grecian host.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Apollo, bearer of the silver bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept no vain watch, and, angry when he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minerva at the side of Diomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to the mighty host of Troy he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roused from sleep a Thracian counsellor⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hippocoön, a kinsman of the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Rhesus. Leaping from his couch, he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vacant spot where the swift steeds had stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, weltering in their blood, the dying chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw, and wept aloud, and called by name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dear companion. Then a clamor rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And boundless tumult, as the Trojans came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All rushing to the spot, and marvelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At what the daring warriors, who were now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning to the hollow ships, had done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when these warriors now had reached the spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Hector’s spy was slain, Ulysses, dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Jupiter, reined in the fiery steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Diomed leaped down and took the spoil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood-stained, and gave it to Ulysses’ hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mounted. Then again they urged the steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, not unwilling, flew along the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First Nestor heard the approaching sound, and said:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Friends, chiefs and princes of the Greeks, my heart⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truly or falsely⁠—urges me to speak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trampling of swift steeds is in my ears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O that Ulysses and the gallant son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tydeus might be bringing at this hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firm-footed coursers from the enemy’s camp!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet must I fear that these, our bravest chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have met disaster from the Trojan crew.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While he was speaking yet, the warriors came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sprang to earth; their friends, rejoicing, flocked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around them, greeting them with grasp of hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with glad words, while the Gerenian knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nestor, inquired: “Declare, illustrious chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glory of Greece, Ulysses, how ye took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These horses: from the foe;⁠—or did some god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestow them? They are glorious as the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft am I midst the Trojans, for, though old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I lag not idly at the ships; yet ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have my eyes looked on coursers like to these.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some god, no doubt, has given them, for to Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The God of storms, and Pallas, blue-eyed child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of aegis-bearing Jove, ye both are dear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then sage Ulysses answered: “Pride of Greece!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neleian Nestor, truly might a god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have given us nobler steeds than even these.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All power is with the gods. But these of which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou askest, aged man, are brought from Thrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And newly come. Brave Diomed hath slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lord, and twelve companions by his side⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All princes. Yet another victim fell⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spy whom, near our ships, we put to death⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man whom Hector and his brother chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent forth by midnight to explore our camp.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and gayly caused the firm-paced steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pass the trench; the other Greeks, well pleased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went with him. When they reached the stately tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Diomed, they led the coursers on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stalls where Diomed’s fleet horses stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Champing the wholesome corn, and bound them there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With halters neatly shaped. Ulysses placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his galley’s stern the bloody spoil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Dolon, to be made an offering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Pallas. Then, descending to the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They washed from knees and neck and thighs the grime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sweat; and when in the salt wave their limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were cleansed, and all the frame refreshed, they stepped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the polished basins of the bath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, having bathed and rubbed with fragrant oil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their limbs, they sat them down to a repast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from a brimming jar beside them drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And poured to Pallas first, the pleasant wine.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
