<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Single Combat of Menelaus and Paris</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Proposal of Hector to end the War by a duel between Menelaus and Paris, the victor to possess Helen and her wealth. — Priam and Helen behold the combat — Description of the principal Greek princes and chiefs, given by Helen to Priam. — Paris snatched away from the Combat by Venus, as he was in danger of being slain, and conveyed to the bedchamber of Helen.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Now when both armies were arrayed for war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each with its chiefs, the Trojan host moved on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shouts and clang of arms, as when the cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of cranes is in the air, that, flying south</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From winter and its mighty breadih of rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wing their way over ocean, and at dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bring fearful battle to the pygmy race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bloodshed and death. But silently the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went forward, breathing valor, mindful still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To aid each other in the coming fray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when the south wind shrouds a mountain-top</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vapors that awake the shepherd's fear,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A surer covert for the thief than night,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And round him one can only see as far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one can hurl a stone,—such was the cloud is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dust that from the warriors' trampling feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose round their rapid march and filled the air.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now drew they near each other, face to face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Paris in the Trojan van pressed on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In presence like a god. A leopard's hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was thrown across his shoulders, and he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A crooked bow and falchion. Brandishing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two brazen-pointed javelins, he defied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mortal fight the bravest of the Greeks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him, Menelaus, loved of Mars, beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Advancing with large strides before the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a hungry lion who has made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A prey of some large beast—a horned stag</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or mountain goat—rejoices, and with speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devours it, though swift hounds and sturdy youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press on his flank, so Menelaus felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great joy when Paris, of the godlike form,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appeared in sight, for now he thought to wreak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His vengeance on the guilty one, and straight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprang from his car to earth with all his arms.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when the graceful Paris saw the chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come toward him from the foremost ranks, his heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was troubled, and he turned and passed among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fellow-warriors and avoided death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one, who meets within a mountain glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A serpent, starts aside with sudden fright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And takes the backward way with trembling limbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cheeks all white,—the graceful Paris thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the son of Atreus shrank in fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mingled with the high-souled sons of Troy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hector beheld and thus upbraided him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harshly: "O luckless Paris, nobly formed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet woman-follower and seducer! Thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouldst never have been born, or else at best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have died unwedded; better were it far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than thus to be a scandal and a scorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all who look on thee. The long-haired Greeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How they will laugh, who for thy gallant looks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deemed thee a hero, when there dwells in thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No spirit and no courage? Wast thou such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, crossing the great deep in thy stanch ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With chosen comrades, thou didst make thy way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among a stranger-people and bear off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A beautiful woman from that distant land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Allied by marriage-ties to warrior-men,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mischief to thy father and to us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the people, to our foes a joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a disgrace to thee? Why couldst thou not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Await Atrides? Then hadst thou been taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From what a valiant warrior thou didst take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His blooming spouse. Thy harp will not avail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor all the gifts of Venus, nor thy locks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor thy fair form, when thou art laid in dust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surely the sons of Troy are faint of heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Else hadst thou, for the evil thou hast wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Been laid beneath a coverlet of stone."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Paris, of the godlike presence, spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In answer: "Hector, thy rebuke is just;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou dost not wrong me. Dauntless is thy heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T is like an axe when, wielded by the hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hews the shipwright's plank, it cuts right through, </span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubling the wielder's force. Such tameless heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dwells in thy bosom. Yet reproach me not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the fair gifts which golden Venus gave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever in their grace the gods bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not to be rejected: 't is not ours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To choose what they shall give us. But if thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desirest to behold my prowess shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In combat, cause the Trojans and the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pause from battle, while, between the hosts, as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I and the warlike Menelaus strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In single fight for Helen and her wealth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoever shall prevail and prove himself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The better warrior, let him take with him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The treasure and the woman, and depart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While all the other Trojans, having made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A faithful league of amity, shall dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Ilium's fertile plain, and all the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Return to Argos, famed for noble steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to Achaia, famed for lovely dames."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and Hector, hearing him, rejoiced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went between the hosts, and with his spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Held by the middle, pressed the phalanxes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Trojans back, and made them all sit down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The long-haired Greeks meanwhile, with bended bows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took aim against him, just about to send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arrows and stones; but Agamemnon, king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of men, beheld, and thus he cried aloud:—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Restrain yourselves, ye Argives; let not fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your arrows, ye Achaians; Hector asks—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He of the beamy helmet asks to speak."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and they refrained, and all, at once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were silent. Hector then stood forth and said:—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Hearken, ye Trojans and ye nobly-armed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achaians, to what Paris says by me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bids the Trojans and the Greeks lay down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their shining arms upon the teeming earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he and Menelaus, loved of Mars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will strive in single combat, on the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the hosts, for Helen and her wealth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he who shall o'ercome, and prove himself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The better warrior, to his home shall bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The treasure and the woman, while the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall frame a solemn covenant of peace."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and both the hosts in silence heard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Menelaus, great in battle, said:—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now hear me also,—me whose spirit feels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wrong most keenly. I propose that now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Greeks and Trojans separate reconciled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For greatly have ye suffered for the sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this my quarrel, and the original fault</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Paris. Whomsoever fate ordains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To perish, let him die; but let the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be from this moment reconciled, and part.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bring an offering of two lamb —one white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other black—to Earth and to the Sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we ourselves will offer one to Jove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be the mighty Priam here, that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May sanction this our compact,—for his sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are arrogant and faithless,—lest some hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wickedly break the covenant of Jove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The younger men are of a fickle mood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when an elder shares the act he looks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both to the past and future, and provides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is most fitting and the best for all."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and both the Greeks and Trojans heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His words with joy, and hoped the hour was come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To end the hard-fought war. They reined their steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to the ranks, alighted, and put off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their armor, which they laid upon the ground us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near them in piles, with little space between.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Hector sent two heralds forth with speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the town, to bring the lambs and call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>King Priam. Meanwhile Agamemnon bade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Talthybius seek the hollow ships and find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lamb for the altar. He obeyed the words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of noble Agamemnon, king of men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile to white-armed Helen Iris came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A messenger. She took a form that seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laodice, the sister of Paris, whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Antenor's son, King Helicaon, wed,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fairest of Priam's daughters. She drew near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Helen, in the palace, weaving there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An ample web, a shining double-robe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereon were many conflicts fairly wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endured by the horse-taming sons of Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brazen-mailed Achaians for her sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the field of Mars. Beside her stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift-footed Iris, and addressed her thus:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Dear lady, come and see the Trojan knights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brazen mailed Achaians doing things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wonder at. They who, in this sad war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eager to slay each other, lately met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In murderous combat on the field, are now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seated in silence, and the war hath ceased.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They lean upon their shields, their massive spears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are near them, planted in the ground upright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paris, and Menelaus, loved of Mars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With their long lances will contend for thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou wilt be declared the victor's spouse."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She said, and in the heart of Helen woke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear recollections of her former spouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of her home and kindred. Instantly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She left her chamber, robed and veiled in white.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shedding tender tears; yet not alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with her went two maidens,— Aethra, child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Pitheus, and the large-eyed Clymene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straight to the Scaean gates they walked, by which</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Panthous, Priam, and Thymoetes sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lampus and Clytius, Hicetaon sprung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Mars, Antenor and Ucalegon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two sages,—elders of the people all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the gates they sat, unapt, through age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For tasks of war, but men of fluent speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the cicadas that within the wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sit on the trees and utter delicate sounds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such were the nobles of the Trojan race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sat upon the tower. But when they marked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The approach of Helen, to each other thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With winged words, but in low tones, they said:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Small blame is theirs, if both the Trojan knights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brazen-mailed Achaians have endured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long so many evils for the sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that one woman. She is wholly like</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In feature to the deathless goddesses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So be it: let her, peerless as she is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Return on board the fleet, nor stay to bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disaster upon us and all our race."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So spake the elders. Priam meantime called</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Helen: "Come, dear daughter, sit by me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou canst behold thy former husband hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy kindred and thy friends. I blame thee not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blame is with the immortals who have sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These pestilent Greeks against me. Sit and name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me this mighty man, the Grecian chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gallant and tall. True, there are taller men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of such noble form arid dignity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I never saw: in truth, a kingly man."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Helen, fairest among women, thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answered: "Dear second father, whom at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fear and honor, would that cruel death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had overtaken me before I left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wander with thy son, my marriage-bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my dear daughter, and the company</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of friends I loved. But that was not to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now I pine and weep. Yet will I tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thou dost ask. The hero whom thou seest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is the wide-ruling Agamemnon, son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Atreus, and is both a gracious king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a most dreaded warrior. He was once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brother-in-law to me, if I may speak—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lost as I am to shame—of such a tie."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She said, the aged man admired, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spake again: "O son of Atreus, born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under a happy fate, and fortunate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the sons of men! A mighty host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Grecian youths obey thy rule. I went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Phrygia once,—that land of vines,—and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw many Phrygians, heroes on fleet steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The troops of Otreus, and of Mygdon, shaped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one of the immortals. They encamped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the Sangarius. I was an ally;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My troops were ranked with theirs upon the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When came the unsexed Amazons to war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet even there I saw not such a host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As this of black-eyed Greeks who muster here."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Priam saw Ulysses, and inquired:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Dear daughter, tell me also who is that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Less tall than Agamemnon, yet more broad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In chest and shoulders. On the teeming earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His armor lies, but he, from place to place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walks round among the ranks of soldiery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when the thick-fleeced father of the flocks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moves through the multitude of his white sheep."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Jove-descended Helen answered thus:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"That is Ulysses, man of many arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Son of Laertes, reared in Ithaca,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That rugged isle, and skilled in every form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of shrewd device and action wisely planned."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then spake the sage Antenor: "Thou hast said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The truth, O lady. This Ulysses once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came on an embassy, concerning thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Troy with Menelaus, great in war;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I received them as my guests, and they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were lodged within my palace, and I learned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The temper and the qualities of both.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When both were standing 'mid the men of Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I marked that Menelaus's broad chest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made him the more conspicuous, but when both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were seated, greater was the dignity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seen in Ulysses. When they both addressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The council, Menelaus briefly spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pleasing tones, though with few words,—as one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not given to loose and wanderingspeech,—although</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The younger. When the wise Ulysses rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stood with eyes cast down, and fixed on earthy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And neither swayed his sceptre to the right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor to the left, but held it motionless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one unused to public speech. He seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An idiot out of humor. But when forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sent from his full lungs his mighty voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And words came like a fall of winter snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No mortal then would dare to strive with him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For mastery in speech. We less admired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The aspect of Ulysses than his words."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beholding Ajax then, the aged king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asked yet again: "Who is that other chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Achaians, tall, and large of limb,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taller and broader-chested than the rest?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Helen, the beautiful and richly-robed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answered: "Thou seest the mighty Ajax there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bulwark of the Greeks. On the other side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among his Cretans, stands Idomeneus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of godlike aspect, near to whom are grouped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The leaders of the Cretans. Oftentimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warlike Menelaus welcomed him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within our palace, when he came from Crete.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could point out and name the other chiefs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the dark-eyed Achaians. Two alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Princes among their people, are not seen,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Castor the fearless horseman, and the skilled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In boxing, Pollux,—twins; one mother bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both them and me. Came they not with the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From pleasant Lacedaemon to the war?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, having crossed the deep in their good ships,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shun they to fight among the valiant ones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Greece, because of my reproach and shame?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She spake; but they already lay in earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Lacedaemon, their dear native land.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now the heralds through the city bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sacred pledges of the gods,—two lambs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And joyous wine, the fruit of Earth, within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A goat-skin. One of them—Idasus—brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A glistening vase and golden drinking-cups,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And summoned, in these words, the aged king:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Son of Laomedon, arise! The chiefs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lead the Trojan knights and brazen-mailed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achaians pray thee to descend at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the plain, that thou mayst ratify</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A faithful compact. Alexander now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And warlike Menelaus will contend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With their long spears for Helen. She and all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her treasures are to be the conqueror's prize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While all the other Trojans, having made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A faithful league of amity, shall dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Ilium's fertile plain, and all the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Return to Argos, famed for noble steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to Achaia, famed for lovely dames."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spake, and Priam, shuddering, heard and bade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The attendants yoke the horses to his car.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon were they yoked; he mounted first and drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The reins; Antenor took a place within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sumptuous car, and through the Scaean gates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They guided the fleet coursers toward the field.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now when the twain had come where lay the hosts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Trojans and Achaians, down they stepped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the teeming earth, and went among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The assembled armies. Quickly, as they came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose Agamemnon, king of men, and next</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uprose the wise Ulysses. To the spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The illustrious heralds brought the sacred things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bind a treaty, and with mingled wine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They filled a chalice, and upon the hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the kings poured water. Then the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Atreus drew a dagger which he wore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slung by his sword's huge sheath, and clipped away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The forelocks of the lambs, and parted them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Trojan and Achaian chiefs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stood with lifted hands and prayed aloud:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O Father Jupiter, who rulest all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Ida, mightiest, most august! and thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O all-beholding and all-hearing Sun!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye Rivers, and thou Earth, and ye who dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the earth and punish after death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those who have sworn false oaths, bear witness ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And keep unbroken this day's promises.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Alexander in the combat slay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My brother Menelaus, he shall keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Helen and all her wealth, while we return</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Homeward in our good ships. If, otherwise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bright-haired Menelaus take the life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Alexander, Helen and her wealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be restored, and they of Troy shall pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such fine as may be meet, and may be long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remembered in the ages yet to come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then if, after Alexander's fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Priam and Priam's sons refuse the fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall make war for it, and keep my place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Troy until I gain the end I seek."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So spake the king, and with the cruel steel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cut the lambs' throats, and laid them on the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Panting and powerless, for the dagger took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their lives away. Then over them they poured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wine from the chalice, drawn in golden cups,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prayed to the ever-living gods; and thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were Trojans and Achaians heard to say:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O Jupiter most mighty and august!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoever first shall break these solemn oaths,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So may their brains flow down upon the earth,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Theirs and their children's,—like the wine we pour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be their wives the wives of other men."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was the people's vow. Saturnian Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confirmed it not. Then Priam, of the line</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Dardanus, addressed the armies thus:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Hear me, ye Trojans, and ye well-greaved Greeks!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me I must return to wind-swept Troy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot bear, with these old eyes, to look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On my dear son engaged in desperate fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Menelaus, the beloved of Mars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jove and the ever-living gods alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Know which of them shall meet the doom of death."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So spake the godlike man, and placed the lambs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within his chariot, mounted, and drew up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The reins. Antenor by him took his place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the sumptuous chariot. Then they turned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The horses and retraced their way to Troy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Hector, son of Priam, and the great</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ulysses measured off a fitting space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a brazen helmet, to decide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which warrior first should hurl the brazen spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They shook the lots, while all the people round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifted their hands to heaven and prayed the gods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus the Trojans and Achaians said:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O Father Jove, who rulest from the top</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ida, mightiest one and most august!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whichever of these twain has done the wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grant that he pass to Pluto's dwelling, slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While friendship and a faithful league are ours."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So spake they. Hector of the beamy helm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looked back and shook the lots. Forth leaped at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lot of Paris. Then they took their seats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ranks beside their rapid steeds, and where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay their rich armor. Paris the divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Husband of bright-haired Helen, there put on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His shining panoply,—upon his legs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair greaves, with silver clasps, and on his breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His brother's mail, Lycaon's, fitting well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His form. Around his shoulders then he hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His silver-studded sword, and stout, broad shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave his glorious brows the dreadful helm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark with its horse-hair plume. A massive spear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Filled his right hand. Meantime the warlike son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Atreus clad himself in like array.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now when both were armed for fight, and each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had left his host, and, coming forward, walked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the Trojans and the Greeks, and frowned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the other, a mute wonder held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojan cavaliers and well-greaved Greeks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There near each other in the measured space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stood in wrathful mood with lifted spears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First Paris hurled his massive spear; it smote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The round shield of Atrides, but the brass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broke not beneath the blow ; the weapon's point</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was bent on that strong shield. The next assault</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Atrides Menelaus made, but first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Offered this prayer to Father Jupiter:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O sovereign Jove! vouchsafe that I avenge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On guilty Paris wrongs which he was first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To offer; let him fall beneath my hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That men may dread hereafter to requite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The friendship of a host with injury."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spake, and flung his brandished spear; it smote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The round shield of Priamides; right through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shining buckler went the rapid steel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, cutting the soft tunic near the flank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood fixed in the fair corselet. Paris bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sideways before it and escaped his death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Atrides drew his silver studded sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifted it high and smote his enemy's crest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weapon, shattered to four fragments, fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He looked to the broad heaven, and thus exclaimed:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O Father Jove! thou art of all the gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The most unfriendly. I had hoped to avenge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wrong by Paris done me, but my sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is broken in my grasp, and from my hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spear was vainly flung and gave no wound."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spake, and, rushing forward, seized the helm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Paris by its horse-hair crest, and turned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dragged him toward the well-armed Greeks. Beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tender throat the embroidered band that held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The helmet to the chin was choking him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now had Menelaus dragged him thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And earned great glory, if the child of Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Venus, had not perceived his plight in time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She broke the ox-hide band; an empty helm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Followed the powerful hand; the hero saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swung it aloft and hurled it toward the Greeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there his comrades seized it. He again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rushed with his brazen spear to slay his foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Venus—for a goddess easily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can work such marvels—rescued him, and, wrapped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a thick shadow, bore him from the field</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And placed him in his chamber, where the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was sweet with perfumes. Then she took her way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To summon Helen. On the lofty tower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She found her, midst a throng of Trojan dames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plucked her perfumed robe. She took the form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And features of a spinner of the fleece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An aged dame, who used to comb for her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair white wool in Lacedaemon's halls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loved her much. In such an humble guise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goddess Venus thus to Helen spake:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Come hither, Alexander sends for thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He now is in his chamber and at rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On his carved couch; in beauty and attire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resplendent, not like one who just returns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From combat with a hero, but like one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who goes to mingle in the choral dance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, when the dance is ended, takes his seat."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She spake, and Helen heard her, deeply moved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet when she marked the goddess's fair neck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful bosom, and soft, lustrous eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her heart was touched with awe, and thus she said:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Strange being! why wilt thou delude me still?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wouldst thou decoy me further on among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The populous Phrygian towns, or those that stud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasant Maeonia, where there haply dwells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some one of mortal race whom thou dost deign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make thy favorite. Hast thou seen, perhaps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Menelaus, having overpowered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The noble Alexander, seeks to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me, hated as I must be, to his home?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hast thou therefore fallen on this device?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go to him, sit by him, renounce for him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The company of gods, and never more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Return to heaven, but suffer with him; watch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside him till he take thee for his wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or handmaid. Thither I shall never go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To adorn his couch and to disgrace myself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojan dames would taunt me. O, the griefs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That press upon my soul are infinite!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Displeased, the goddess Venus answered: "Wretch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incense me not, lest I abandon thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In anger, and detest thee with a zeal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As great as is my love, and lest I cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trojans and Greeks to hate thee, so that thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shalt miserably perish." Thus she spake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Helen, Jove-begotten, struck with awe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrapped in a robe of shining white, went forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In silence from amidst the Trojan dames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unheeded, for the goddess led the way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When now they stood beneath the sumptuous roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Alexander, straightway did the maids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn to their wonted tasks, while she went up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fairest of women, to her chamber. There</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The laughing Venus brought and placed a seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right opposite to Paris. Helen sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daughter of tegis-bearing Jove, with eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Averted, and reproached her husband thus:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Com'st thou from battle? Rather would that thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hadst perished by the mighty hand of him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who was my husband. It was once, I know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy boast that thou wert more than peer in strength</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And power of hand, and practice with the spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To warlike Menelaus. Go then now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Defy him to the combat once again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet I counsel thee to stand aloof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor rashly seek a combat, hand to hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fair haired Menelaus, lest perchance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He smite thee with his spear and thou be slain."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Paris answered: "Woman, chide me not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus harshly. True it is, that, with the aid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Pallas, Menelaus hath obtained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The victory; but I may vanquish him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In turn, for we have also gods with us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give we the hour to dalliance; never yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have I so strongly proved the power of love,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not even when 1 bore thee from thy home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pleasant Lacedaemon, traversing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deep in my good ships, and in the isle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Cranae made thee mine,— such glow of love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possesses me, and sweetness of desire."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spake, and to the couch went up; his wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Followed, and that fair couch received them both.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime Atrides, like a beast of prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went fiercely ranging through the crowd in search</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of godlike Alexander. None of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojans, or of their renowned allies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could point him out to Menelaus, loved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Mars; and had they known his lurking-place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would not for his sake have kept him hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For like black death they hated him. Then stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among them Agamemnon, king of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spake: "Ye Trojans and Achaians, hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ye allies. The victory belongs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To warlike Menelaus. Ye will then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Restore the Argive Helen and her wealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pay the fittmg fine, which shall remain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A memory to men in future times."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus spake the son of Atreus, and the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Achaian host approved his words.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
