<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 24</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"/>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-24" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>THE assembly was dissolved, the people all Dispersed to their swift galleys, and prepared With food and gentle slumber to refresh Their wearied frames. But still Achilles wept, Remembering his dear comrade. Sleep, whose sway . s Is over all, came not; he turned and tossed, Still yearning for his strong and valiant friend Patroclus. All that they had ever done Together, all the hardships they had borne, The battles fought with heroes, the wild seas «■ O'erpassed, came thronging on his memory. He shed warm tears, as now upon his sides, Now on his back, now on his face he lay. Then, starting from his couch, he wandered forth In sorrow by the margin of the deep. u Nor did the morn that rose o'er sea and shore Dawn unperceived by him; for then he yoked His fleet steeds to the chariot, and made fast The corse of Hector, that it might be dragged After the wheels. Three times around the tomb •0 Of Menoetiades he dragged the slain, Then turned and sought his tent, again to rest, And left him there stretched out amid the dust With the face downward. Yet Apollo, moved Page 321 Book XXIV. 32t With pity for the hero, kept him free ,s From soil or stain, though dead, and o'er him held The golden aegis, lest, when roughly dragged , Along the ground, the body might be torn. So in his anger did Achilles treat Unworthily the noble Hector's corse. *, The blessed gods themselves with pity looked Upon the slain, and bade the vigilant one, The Argus-queller, bear him thence by stealth. This counsel pleased the immortals all, except Juno and Neptune and the blue-eyed maid, c And these persisted in their wrath. To them Ilium, the hallowed city, and its king, Priam, and all his people, from the first Were hateful; 't was for Alexander's fault, Affronting the two goddesses what time *, They sought his cottage, and preferring her Who ministered to his calamitous love. But now, when the twelfth morning from that day Arose, Apollo spake among the gods : — "Cruel are ye, O gods, and prone to wrong. « For was not Hector wont before your shrines To burn the thighs of chosen bulls and goats? And now that he is dead ye venture not To rescue him, and let his wife and son And mother and King Priam look again y, Upon his face. Soon would they light the pile, And burn the dead, and pay the funeral rite. Ye seek to favor, O ye gods, that pest 14* u Page 322 322 The Iliad. Achilles, in whose breast there dwells no love Of justice, nor a temper to be moved By prayers, but who delights in savage deeds. And as a lion, conscious of vast strength And scornful of resistance, falls upon The shepherd's flock, and slays for his repast, Thus with Achilles neither mercy dwells Nor shame, which often profits, often harms Mankind. For when another man has met A greater grief than he, — has lost, perchance, A brother or a son, — he dries at length His tears, and ceases to lament; for fate Bestows the power to suffer patiently. But this Achilles, after he has spoiled The godlike Hector of his life in war, Hath bound him to his chariot, and hath dragged The corse around his dear companion's tomb. Unseemly is the deed, and small will be The good it brings him. Brave although he be. We may be angry with him when he thus Insults a portion of insensible earth." The white-armed Juno was incensed, and spake "So mightst thou say, God of the silver bow, Were equal honor to Achilles due And Hector. Hector is a mortal man, And suckled at a woman's breast. Not so Achilles; he was born of one of us, A goddess whom I nurtured and brought up And gave to Peleus. Ye were present all, Page 323 Book XXIV. 323 Ye gods, when they were wedded. Thou wert there To share the marriage banquet, harp in hand, Thou plotter with the vile, thou faithless one!" «s Then answered cloud-compelling Jove, and said: "Let not thy anger rise against the gods, O Juno, for the honor of the chiefs Shall not be equal. Yet of all the race Of mortals dwelling in the city of Troy m Was Hector dearest to the gods; to me He ever was; and never did he fail To offer welcome gifts. My altar ne'er Lacked fitting feast, libation, and the fume Of incense, — hallowed rites which are our due. m Yet seek we not to steal away the corse Of valiant Hector; that we could not do Without his slayer's knowledge, who by night And day is ever near to him and keeps Watch o'er him like a mother. Let some god •«» Call hither Thetis. I will counsel her Prudently, that Achilles may receive Ransom from Priam, and restore his son." He ceased, and with the swiftness of the storm Rose Iris up, to be his messenger. 103 Half way 'twixt Samos and the rugged coast Of Imbrus down she plunged to the dark sea, Entering the deep with noise. Far down she sank As sinks the ball of lead, that, sliding o'er A wild bull's horn, bears into ocean's depths no Death to the greedy fishes. There she found Page 324 324 The Iliad. Thetis within her roomy cave, among The goddesses of ocean, seated round In full assembly. Thetis in the midst Bewailed the fate of her own blameless SOn, r»s About to perish on the fertile soil Of Troy, and far from Greece. The swift of w ing, Iris, approached her and addressed her thus : — "Arise, O Thetis. Father Jupiter, Whose counsel stands forever, sends for thee." » And silver-footed Thetis answered him: "Why should that potent deity require My presence, who have many griefs, and shrink From mingling with immortals? Yet I go, Perforce, for never doth he speak in vain." ,•s So spake the goddess-queen, and, speaking, took Her mantle, — darker web was never worn, — And onward went. Wind-footed Iris led The way; the waters of the sea withdrew On either side. They climbed the steepy shore, And took their way to heaven. They found the son Of Saturn, him of the far-sounding voice, With all the blessed, ever-living gods Assembled round him. Close to Father Jove She took her seat, for Pallas yielded it, 'is And Juno put a beautiful cup of gold Into her hand, and spake consoling words. She drank and gave it back, and thus began The father of immortals and of men :— "Thou comest to Olympus, though in grief, tm Page 325 Book XXIV. 325 O goddess Thetis, and I know the cause That makes thee sad and will not from thy thoughts; Yet let me now declare why I have called Thee hither. For nine days the immortal gods Have been at strife concerning Hector's corse us And Peleus' son, the spoiler. They have asked The vigilant Argus-queller to remove The dead by stealth. But I must yet bestow Fresh honor on Achilles, and thus keep Thy love and reverence. Now descend at once ,s» Into the camp and carry to thy son My message: say that it offends the gods, And me the most, that in his spite he keeps The corse of Hector at the beaked ships, Refusing to restore it. He perchance 1ss Will listen, and, revering me, give back The slain. And I will send a messenger, Iris, to large-souled Priam, bidding him Hasten in person to the Grecian fleet, To ransom his beloved son, and bring no Achilles gifts that shall appease his rage." He spake: the goddess of the silver feet, Thetis, obeyed, and with precipitate flight Descended from the mountain-peaks. She came To her son's tent, and found him uttering moans i«s Continually, while his beloved friends Were busy round him; they prepared a feast, And had just slain within the tent a ewe Of ample size and fleece. She took her seat ,«» Page 326 The Iliad. Beside her son, and smoothed his brow, and said :— "How long, my son, wilt thou lament and grieve And pine at heart, abstaining from the feast And from thy couch? Yet well it is to seek A woman's love. Thy life will not be spared Long time to me, for death and cruel fate to Stand near thee. Listen to me; I am come A messenger from Jove, who bids me say The immortals are offended, and himself The most, that thou shouldst in thy spite detain The corse of Hector at the beaked ships, a» Refusing its release. Comply thou then, And take the ransom and restore the dead." And thus Achilles, swift of foot, replied: "Let him who brings the ransom come and take The body, if it be the will of Jove." iss Thus did the mother and the son confer Among the galleys, and between them passed Full many a winged word, while Saturn's son Bade Iris go with speed to sacred Troy: — "Fleet Iris, haste thee. Leave the Olympian seats, ,»» And send magnanimous Priam to the fleet, To ransom his dear son, and bear him back To Ilium. Let him carry gifts to calm The anger of Achilles. He should go Alone, no Trojan with him, save a man ns In years, a herald, who may guide the mules And strong-wheeled chariot, harnessed to bear back Page 327 Book XXIV. 327 Him whom the great Achilles has o'erthrown; And let him fear not death nor other harm, For we will send a guide to lead him safe, «» The Argus-queller, till he stand beside Achilles; and when once he comes within The warrior's tent, Achilles will not raise His hand to slay, but will restrain the rest. Nor mad, nor rash, nor criminal is he, »0s And will humanely spare a suppliant man." He spake, and Iris, the swift messenger, Whose feet are like the wind, went forth with speed, And came to Priam's palace, where she found Sorrow and wailing. Round the father sat «» His sons within the hall, and steeped with tears Their garments. In the midst the aged man Sat with a cloak wrapped round him, and much dust Strewn on his head and neck, which, when he rollcd Upon the earth, he gathered with his hands. tis His daughters and the consorts of his sons Filled with their cries the mansion, sorrowing For those, the many and brave, who now lay slain By Grecian hands. The ambassadress of Jove Stood beside Priam, and in soft, low tones, «« While his limbs shook with fear, addressed him thus: — "Be comforted, and have no fear; for I Am come, Dardanian Priam, not to bring Mischief, but blessing. I am sent to thee A messenger from Jove, who, though afar, «s Page 328 328 The Iliad. Pities thee and will aid thee. He who rules Olympus bids thee ransom thy slain son, The noble Hector, carrying gifts to calm The anger of Achilles. Thou shouldst go Alone, no Trojan with thee, save a man r» In years, a herald, who shall guide the mules And strong-wheeled chariot, harnessed to bring back Him whom the great Achilles has o'erthrown. And have no fear of death or other harm; A guide shall go with thee to lead thee safe, *ss The Argus-queller, till thou stand beside Achilles, and when once thou art within The warrior's tent, Achilles will not raise His hand to slay, but will restrain the rest. He is not mad, nor rash, nor prone to crime, f And will humanely spare a suppliant man." Thus the swift-footed Iris spake, and then Departed. Priam bade his sons prepare The strong-wheeled chariot, drawn by mules, and bind A coffer on it. He descended next ms Into a fragrant chamber, cedar-lined, High-roofed, and stored with many things of price, And calling Hecuba, his wife, he said : — "Dear wife, a message from Olympian Jove Commands that I betake me to the fleet, 0s0 And thence redeem my slaughtered son with gifts That may appease Achilles. Tell me now How this may seem to thee? for I am moved Page 329 Book XXIV. 329 By a strong impulse to approach the ships, And venture into the great Grecian camp." »ss He spake: his consort wept, and answered thus: "Ah me! the prudence which was once so praised By strangers and by those who own thy sway, Where is it now? Why wouldst thou go alone To the Greek fleet, to meet the eye of him *0 Who slew so many of thy gallant sons? An iron heart is thine. If that false man, Remorseless as he is, should see thee there And seize thee, neither pity nor respect Hast thou to hope from him. Let us lament *t Our Hector in these halls. A cruel fate Spun, when I brought him forth, his thread of life, — That far from us his corse should feed the hounds Near that fierce man, whose liver I could tear From out his bosom. Then the indignities »7» Done to my son would be repaid, for he Was slain, not shunning combat, coward-like, But fighting to defend the men of Troy And the deep-bosomed Trojan dames. He fell Without a thought of flight or of retreat." »7s And thus the aged, godlike king rejoined: "Keep me not back from going, nor be thou A bird of evil omen in these halls, For thou shalt not persuade me. This I say: If any of the dwellers of the earth, a, Soothsayer, seer, or priest, had said to me What I have heard, I well might deem the words Page 330 330 The Iliad. A lie, and heed them not. But since I heard Myself the mandate from a deity, And saw her face to face, I certainly m Will go, nor shall the message be in vain. And should it be my fate to perish there Beside the galleys of the mail-clad Greeks, So be it; for Achilles will forthwith Put me to death embracing my poor son, *r And satisfying my desire to weep." He spake, and, raising the fair coffer-lids, Took out twelve robes of state most beautiful, Twelve single cloaks, as many tapestried mats, And tunics next and mantles twelve of each, 0« And ten whole talents of pure gold, which first He weighed. Two burnished tripods from his store He added, and four goblets and a cup Of eminent beauty, which the men of Thrace Gave him when, as an envoy to their coast, »™ He came from Troy, — a sumptuous gift, and yet The aged king reserved not even this To deck his palace, such was his desire To ransom his dear son. And then he drave Away the Trojans hovering round his porch, sos Rebuking them with sharp and bitter words :— "Hence with you, worthless wretches! have ye not Sorrow enough at home, that ye are come To vex me thus? Or doth it seem to you Of little moment, that Saturnian Jove s» Page 331 Book XXIV. 331 Hath sent such grief upon me in the loss Of my most valiant son? Ye yet will know How great that loss has been; for it will be A lighter task for the beleaguering Greeks To work our ruin, now that he is dead. 3,s But I shall sink to Hades ere mine eyes Behold the city sacked and made a spoil." He spake, and with his staff he chased away The loiterers; forth before the aged man They went . With like harsh words he chid his sons. Helenus, Paris, noble Agathon, v Pammon, Antiphonus, Deiphobus, Polites, great in war, Hippothoiis, And gallant Dios, nine in all he called, And thus bespake them with reproachful words : — "Make haste, ye idle fellows, my disgrace! 3* Would ye had all been slain beside the fleet Instead of Hector! Woe is me! the most Unhappy of mankind am I, who had The bravest sons in all the town of Troy, o, And none of them, I think, are left to me. Mestor, divine in presence, Troilus, The gallant knight, and Hector, he who looked A god among his countrymen, — no son Of man he seemed, but of immortal birth, — 33s Those Mars has slain, but these who are my shame Remain, — these liars, dancers, excellent In choirs, whose trade is public robbery Of lambs and kids. Why haste ye not to get Page 332 332 The Iliad. My chariot ready, and bestow these things w, Within it, that my journey may begin?" He spake, and they, in fear of his rebuke, Lifted from out its place the strong-wheeled car, Framed to be drawn by mules, and beautiful, And newly built, and on it they made fast ws The coffer. From its pin they next took down The boxwood mule-yoke, fitted well with rings, And carved with a smooth boss. With this they brought A yoke-band nine ells long, which carefully Adjusting to the polished pole's far end, 3s» They cast the ring upon the bolt, and thrice Wound the long band on each side of the bolt Around the yoke, and made it fast, and turned The loose ends under. Then they carried forth The treasures that should ransom Hector's corse; « And having piled them in the polished car, They yoked the hardy, strong-hoofed mules which once The Mysians gave to Priam, princely gifts. To bear the yoke of Priam they led forth The horses which the aged man himself 3, Fed at the polished manger. These the king Yoked, aided by the herald, while in mind, Within the palace court, they both revolved Their prudent counsels. Hecuba, the queen, Came to them in deep sorrow. In her hand *s She bore a golden cup of delicate wine, Page 333 Book XXIV. 333 That they might make libations and depart. She stood before the steeds, and thus she spake :— "Take this, and pour to Father Jove, and pray That thou mayst safely leave the enemy's camp r.* For home, since't is thy will, though I dissuade, To go among the ships. Implore thou then The god of Ida and the gatherer Of the black tempest, Saturn's son, who looks Down on all Troy, to send his messenger, 3rs His swift and favorite bird, of matchless strength, On thy right hand, that, with thine eye on him, Thou mayst with courage journey to the ships Of the Greek horsemen. But if Jupiter All-seeing should withhold his messenger, 3, I cannot bid thee, eager as thou art, Adventure near the galleys of the Greeks." And thus the godlike Priam made reply: "Dear wife, indeed, I will not disobey Thy counsel; meet it is to raise our hands iss To Jove, and ask him to be merciful." He spake, and bade the attendant handmaid pour Pure water on his hands, for near him stood A maid who came and held a basin forth And ewer. When his hands were washed, he took The goblet from the queen, and then, in prayer, », Stood in the middle of the court, and poured The wine, and, looking heavenward, spake aloud :— "O Father Jove, most glorious and most great, Who rulest all from Ida, let me find »s Page 334 334 The Iliad. Favor and pity with Achilles. Send A messenger, thy own swift, favorite bird, Of matchless strength, on my right hand, that I, Beholding him, may confidently pass To where the fleet of the Greek horsemen lies!" ♦» Thus in his prayer he spake, and Jupiter, The All-disposer, hearkened, and sent forth An eagle, bird of surest augury, Named the Black Chaser, and by others called Percnos, with wings as broad as is the door **s Skilfully fashioned for the lofty hall Of some rich man, and fastened with a bolt. Such ample wings he spread on either side As townward on the right they saw him fly. They saw and they rejoiced ; their hearts grew light Within their bosoms. Then the aged king 4» Hastened to mount the polished car, and drave Through vestibule and echoing porch. The mules, Harnessed to draw the four-wheeled car, went first, Driven by the sage Idaeus ; after them, vs The horses, urged by Priam with the lash Rapidly through the city. All his friends Followed lamenting, as for one who went To meet his death. And now when they had reached The plain descending from the town, the sons ♦» And sons-in-law of Priam all returned To Ilium, and the twain proceeded on, Yet not unmarked by all-beholding Jove, Who, moved with pity for the aged man, Page 335 Book XXIV. 335 Turned to his well-beloved son and said :— «s "Hermes, who more than any other god Delightest to consort with human kind, And willingly dost listen to their prayers, Haste, guide King Priam to the Grecian fleet, Yet so that none may see him, and no Greek »*, Know of his coming, till he stand before Pelides." Thus he spake: the messenger Who slew the Argus hearkened and obeyed; And hastily beneath his feet he bound The fair, ambrosial, golden sandals worn «s To bear him over ocean like the wind, And o'er the boundless land. His wand he took Wherewith he seals in sleep the eyes of men, And opens them at will. With this in hand, The mighty Argus-queller flew, and soon 4*, Was at the Troad and the Hellespont. Like to some royal stripling seemed the god, In youth's first prime, when youth has most of grace. And there the Trojans twain, when they had passed The tomb of Ilus, halted with their mules 4« And horses, that the beasts might drink the stream; For twilight now was creeping o'er the earth. The herald looked, and saw that Mercury Was near, and thus, addressing Priam, said:— "Be on thy guard, O son of Dardanus, 4s0 For here is cause for wariness. I see A warrior, and I think he seeks our lives. Now let us urge our steeds and fly, or else Page 336 336 The fluid. Descend and clasp his knees, and sue for grace." He spake, and greatly.was the aged king «» Bewildered by his words; with hair erect He stood, and motionless, while Mercury Drew near, and took the old man's hand, and asked : — "Whither, O father, guidest thou thy mules And steeds in the dim night, while others sleep? «*• Fearest thou nothing from the warlike Greeks, Thy foes, who hate thee, and are near at hand? Should one of them behold thee bearing off These treasures in the swiftly darkening night, What wouldst thou do? Thou art not young, and he Who comes with thee is old; ye could not make Defence against the foe. Fear nought from me, And I will save thee, since thou art so like To my own father, from all other harm." Priam, the godlike ancient, answered thus: »o "Thou sayest true, dear son; but sure some god Holds over me his kind, protecting hand, Who sends a guide like thee to join me here, So noble art thou both in form and air, And gracious are thy thoughts, and blessed they m Who gave thee birth." With that the messenger, The Argus-queller, spake again, and said: "Most wisely hast thou spoken, aged man. But tell, and truly, why thou bearest hence This store of treasures among stranger men? * Is it that they may be preserved for thee? Page 337 Book XXIV. Or are ye all deserting in alarm Your hallowed Troy? for such a man of might Was thy brave son who died, that I may say The Greeks in battle had no braver man." And Priam, godlike ancient, spake in turn: "Who then art thou, and of what parents born, Excellent youth, who dost in such kind words Speak of the death of my unhappy son?" The herald, Argus-queller, answered him: "I see that thou wouldst prove me, aged man, By questions touching Hector, whom I oft Have seen with mine own eyes in glorious fight, Putting the Greeks to rout and slaying them By their swift ships with that sharp spear of his. We stood and marvelled, for Achilles, wroth With Agamemnon, would not suffer us To join the combat. I attend on him; The same good galley brought us to this shore, And I am one among his Myrmidons. Polyctor is my father, who is rich, And now as old as thou. Six are his sons Beside me, I the seventh. In casting lots With them, it fell to me that I should come To Ilium with Achilles. I am here In coming from the fleet, for with the dawn The dark-eyed Greeks are planning to renew The war around the city. They have grown Impatient of long idleness; their chiefs Seek vainly to restrain their warlike rage." vol. n. 15 v Page 338 338 The Iliad. Then spake the godlike ancient, Priam, thus: "If thou indeed dost serve Pelides, tell, And truly tell me, whether yet my son Is at the fleet, or has Achilles cast, Torn limb from limb, his body to the hounds?" s's The herald, Argus-queller, thus replied: "O aged monarch, neither have the hounds Devoured thy son, nor yet the birds of prey; But near the galleys of Achilles still He lies neglected and among the tents. s» Twelve mornings have beheld him lying there, Nor hath corruption touched him, nor the worms That make the slain their feast begun to feed. 'T is true that, when the holy morning dawns Achilles drags him fiercely round the tomb Of his dear friend; yet that disfigures not The dead. Shouldst thou approach him, thou wouldst see With marvelling eyes how fresh and dewy still The body lies, the blood all cleansed away, Unsoiled in every part, and all the wounds a» Closed up wherever made; for many a spear Was thrust into his sides. Thus tenderly The blessed gods regard thy son, though dead, For dearly was he loved by them in life." He spake; the aged man was comforted, sis And said: "'T is meet, O son, that we should pay Oblations to the immortals; for my son While yet alive neglected not within Page 339 Book XXIV. 339 His palace the due worship of the gods Who dwell upon Olympus; therefore they s» Are mindful of him, even after death. Take this magnificent goblet; be my guard, And guide me, by the favor of the gods, Until I reach Pelides in his tent." Again the herald, Argus-queller, spake: s4s "Thou seekest yet to try me, aged man, Who younger am than thou. Yet think thou not That I, without the knowledge of my chief, Will take thy gifts; for in my heart I fear Achilles, nor would wrong him in the least, ss» Lest evil come upon me. Yet I go Willingly with thee, as thy faithful guide. Were it as far as Argos the renowned, In a swift galley, or on foot by land, Yet none would dare to harm thee while with me." So Hermes spake, and leaped into the car, sss And took into his hands the lash and reins, And breathed into the horses and the mules Fresh vigor. Coming to the wall and trench About the ships, they found the guard engaged s*, With their night-meal. The herald Argicide Poured sleep upon them all, and quickly flung The gates apart, and pushed aside the bars, And led in Priam, with the costly gifts Heaped on the car. They went until they reached The lofty tent in which Achilles sat, s* Reared by the Myrmidons to lodge their king, Page 340 340 The Iliad. With timbers of hewn fir, and over-roofed With thatch, for which the meadows had been mown, And fenced for safety round with rows of stakes. ?7« One fir-tree bar made fast its gate, which three Strong Greeks were wont to raise aloft, and three Were needed to take down the massive beam. Achilles wielded the vast weight alone; Beneficent Hermes opened it before The aged man, and brought the treasures in, Designed for swift Achilles. Then he left The car and stood upon the ground, and said :— "O aged monarch, I am Mercury, An ever-living god; my father, Jove, s-a Bade me attend thy journey. I shall now Return, nor must Achilles look on me; It is not meet that an immortal god Should openly befriend a mortal man. Enter, approach Pelides, clasp his knees; s»s Entreat him by his father, and his son, And fair-haired mother; so shall he be moved." Thus having spoken, Hermes took his way Back to the Olympian summit. Priam then Sprang from the chariot to the ground. He left Idseus there to guard the steeds and mules, And, hastening to the tent where, dear to Jove, Achilles lodged, he found the chief within, While his companions sat apart, save two, — Automedon the brave, and Alcimus, *,s Who claimed descent from Mars. These stood near by, Page 341 Book XXIV. 341 And ministered to Peleus' son, who then Was closing a repast, and had just left The food and wine, and still the table stood. Unmarked the royal Priam entered in, And, coming to Achilles, clasped his knees, And kissed those fearful slaughter-dealing hands, By which so many of his sons had died. And as, when some blood-guilty man, whose hand In his own land has slain a fellow-man, «0s Flees to another country, and the abode Of some great chieftain, all men look on him Astonished, — so, when godlike Priam first Was seen, Achilles was amazed, and all Looked on each other, wondering at the sight . «10 And thus King Priam supplicating spake :— "Think of thy father, an old man like me, Godlike Achilles! On the dreary verge Of closing life he stands, and even now Haply is fiercely pressed by those who dwell «1s Around him, and has none to shield his age From war and its disasters. Yet his heart Rejoices when he hears thou yet dost live, And every day he hopes that his dear son Will come again from Troy. My lot is hard, For I was father of the bravest sons In all wide Troy, and none are left me now. Fifty were with me when the men of Greece Arrived upon our coast; nineteen of these Owned the same mother, and the rest were born c»s Page 342 342 The Iliad. Withm my palaces. Remorseless Mars Already had laid lifeless most of these, And Hector, whom I cherished most, whose arm Defended both our city and ourselves, Him didst thou lately slay while combating 030 For his dearcountry. For his sake I come To the Greek fleet, and to redeem his corse I bring uncounted ransom. O, revere The gods, Achilles, and be merciful, Calling to mind thy father! happier he «3s Than I; for I have borne what no man else That dwells on earth could bear, — have laid my lips Upon the hand of him who slew my son." He spake: Achilles sorrowfully thought Of his own father. By the hand he took a*, The suppliant, and with gentle force removed The old man from him. Both in memory Of those they loved were weeping. The old king, With many tears, and rolling in the dust Before Achilles, mourned his gallant son. «« Achilles sorrowed for his father's sake, And then bewailed Patroclus, and the sound Of lamentation filled the tent. At last Achilles, when he felt his heart relieved By tears, and that strong grief had spent its force, *0 Sprang from his seat; then lifting by the hand The aged man, and pitying his white head And his white chin, he spake these winged words :— "Great have thy sufferings been, unhappy king I Page 343 Book XXIV. 343 How couldst thou venture to approach alone «ss The Grecian fleet, and show thyself to him Who slew so many of thy valiant sons? j__ An iron heart is thine. But seat thyself, . .• And let us, though afflicted grievously, Allow our woes to sleep awhile, for grief «o Indulged can bring no good. The gods ordain The lot of man to suffer, while themselves Are free from care. Beside Jove's threshold stand Two casks of gifts for man. One cask contains The evil, one the good, and he to whom «s The Thunderer gives them mingled sometimes falls Into misfortune, and is sometimes crowned With blessings. But the man to whom he gives The evil only stands a mark exposed To wrong, and, chased by grim calamity, '70 Wanders the teeming earth, alike unloved By gods and men. So did the gods bestow Munificent gifts on Peleus from his birth, For eminent was he among mankind For wealth and plenty; o'er the Myrmidons «n He ruled, and, though a mortal, he was given A goddess for a wife. Yet did the gods Add evil to the good, for not to him Was born a family of kingly sons Within his house, successors to his reign. «0 One short-lived son is his, nor am I there To cherish him in his old age; but h :re Do I remain, far from my native land, Page 344 344 The Iliad. In Troy, and causing grief to thee and thine. Of thee too, aged king, they speak, as one «»s Wi'cose wealth was large in former days, when all lifenrLesbos, seat of Macar, owns was thine, And all in Phrygia and the shores that bound The Hellespont; men said thou didst excel All others in thy riches and thy sons. **, But since the gods have brought this strife on thee War and perpetual slaughter of brave men Are round thy city. Yet be firm of heart, Nor grieve forever. Sorrow for thy son Will profit nought; it cannot bring the dead «w To life again, and while thou dost afflict Thyself for him fresh woes may fall on thee." A.nd thus the godlike Priam, aged king, Made answer: "Bid me not be seated here, Nursling of Jove, while Hector lies among r» Thy tents unburied. Let me ransom him At once, that I may look on him once more With my own eyes. Receive the many gifts We bring thee, and mayst thou possess them long, And reach thy native shore, since by thy grace -m I live and yet behold the light of day." Achilles heard, and, frowning, thus rejoined: "Anger me not, old man; 't was in my thought To let thee ransom Hector. To my tent The mother came who bore me, sent from Jove, 710 The daughter of the Ancient of the Sea, And I perceive, nor can it be concealed, Page 345 Book XXIV. 345 O Priam, that some god hath guided thee To our swift galleys; for no mortal man, Though in his prime of youthful strength, would dare To come into the camp; he could not pass 716 The guard, nor move the beams that bar our gates. So then remind me of my griefs no more, Lest, suppliant as thou art, I leave thee not Unharmed, and thus transgress the laws of Jove." 7*, He spake: the aged man in fear obeyed. And then Pelides like a lion leaped Forth from the door, yet not alone he went; For of his comrades two — Automedon, The hero, and his comrade Alcimus, m He whom Achilles held in most esteem After the slain Patroclus — followed him. The mules and horses they unyoked, and led The aged monarch's clear-voiced herald in, And bade him sit. Then from the polished car 7* They took the costly ransom of the corse Of Hector, save two cloaks, which back they laid With a fair tunic, that their chief might give The body shrouded to be borne to Troy. And then he called the maidens, bidding them 73s Wash and anoint the dead, yet far apart From Priam, lest, with looking on his son, The grief within his heart might rise uncurbed To anger, and Achilles in his rage Might stay him and transgress the laws of Jove. And when the handmaids finished, having washed «5" Page 346 346 The Iliad. The body and anointed it with oil, And wrapped a sumptuous cloak and tunic round The limbs, Achilles lifted it himself And placed it on a bier. His comrades gave 74s Their aid, and raised it to the polished car. When all was done, Achilles groaned, and called By name the friend he dearly loved, and said :— "O my Patroclus, be not wroth with me Shouldst thou in Hades hear that I restore t» Hector to his dear father, since I take A ransom not unworthy; but of this I yield to thee the portion justly thine." So spake the godlike warrior, and withdrew Into his tent, and took the princely seat 7ss From which he had arisen, opposite To that of Priam, whom he thus bespake : — "Behold thy son is ransomed, aged man, As thou hast asked, and lies upon his bier. Thou shalt behold him with the early dawn, 7* And bear him hence. Now let us break our fast, For even Niobe, the golden-haired, Refrained not from her food, though children twelve Perished within her palace, — six young sons And six fair daughters. Phoebus slew the sons 7«s With arrows from his silver bow, incensed At Niobe, while Dian, archer queen, Struck down the daughters; for the mother dared To make herself the peer of rosy-cheeked Latona, who, she boastfully proclaimed, 770 Page 347 Book XXIV. 347 Had borne two children only, while herself Had brought forth many. Yet, though only two, The children of Latona took the lives Of all her own. Nine days ihe corses lay In blood, and there was none to bury them, m For Jove had changed the dwellers of the place To stone; but on the tenth the gods of heaven Gave burial to the dead. Yet Niobe, Though spent with weeping long, did not refrain From food. And now forever mid the rocks 7*, And desert hills of Sipylus, where lie, Fame says, the couches of the goddess-nymphs, Who lead the dance where Acheloiis flows, Although she be transformed to stone, she broods Over the woes inflicted by the gods. 7«s But now, O noble Ancient, let us sit At our repast, and thou mayst afterward Mourn thy beloved son, while bearing him Homeward, to be bewailed with many tears." Achilles, the swift-footed, spake, and left 790 His seat, and, slaying a white sheep, he bade His comrades flay and dress it. Then they carved The flesh in portions which they fixed on spits, And roasted carefully, and drew them back. And then Automedon distributed 79$ The bread in shapely canisters around The table, while Achilles served the flesh, And all put forth their hands and shared the feast. But when their thirst and hunger were appeased, Page 348 348 The Iliad. Dardanian Priam fixed a wondering look Upon Achilles, who in nobleness Of form was like the gods. Achilles fixed A look of equal wonder on his guest, Dardanian Priam, for he much admired His gracious aspect and his pleasant speech. *,s And when at length they both withdrew their gaze, Priam, the godlike Ancient, spake, and said : — "Nursling of Jove, dismiss me speedily To rest, that we may lie, and be refreshed With gentle slumbers. Never have these eyes sio Been closed beneath their lids, since by thy hand My Hector lost his life; and evermore I mourn and cherish all my griefs, and writhe Upon the ground within my palace courts; But I have taken food at last, and drunk *,s Draughts of red wine, untasted till this hour." Achilles bade the attending men and maids Place couches in the porch, and over them Draw sumptuous purple mats on which to lay Embroidered tapestries, and on each of these Spread a broad, fleecy mantle, covering all. Forth went the train with torches in their hands, And quickly spread two couches. Then the swift Achilles pleasantly to Priam said : — "Sleep, excellent old man, without the tent, Lest some one of our counsellors arrive, Such as oft come within my tent to sit And talk of warlike matters. Seeing thee Page 349 Book XXIV. 349 In the dark hours of night, he might relate The tale to Agamemnon, king of men, »*, And hinder thus the ransom of thy son. But say, and truly say, how many days Requirest thou to pay the funeral rites To noble Hector, so that I may rest As many, and restrain the troops from war." Then answered godlike Priam, aged king: "Since, then, thou wilt, Achilles, that we pay The rites of burial to my noble son, I own the favor. Well thou knowest how We Trojans are constrained to keep within «40 The city walls, for it is far to bring Wood from the mountains, and we fear to dare The journey. Nine days would we mourn the dea 1 Within our dwellings, and upon the tenth Would bury him, and make a solemn feast, m And the next day would rear his monument, And on the twelfth, if needful, fight again." And swift Achilles, godlike chief, rejoined: "Be it, O reverend Priam, as thou wilt, And for that space will I delay the war." «s» He spake, and that the aged king might feel No fear, he grasped his right hand at the wrist; And then King Priam and the herald went To sleep within the porch, but wary still. Achilles slumbered in his stately tent, tss The rosy-cheeked Briseis at his side, And all the other gods and men who fought Page 350 Tlu Iliad. In chariots gave themselves to slumber, save Beneficent Hermes; sleep came not to him, For still he meditated how to bring tem King Priam back from the Achaian fleet Unnoticed by the watchers at the gate. So at the monarch's head he stood, and spake:— "O aged king, thou givest little heed To danger, sleeping thus amid thy foes, «j Because Achilles spares thee. Thou hast paid Large ransom for thy well-beloved son, And yet the sons whom thou hast left in Troy Would pay three times that ransom for thy life, Should Agamemnon, son of Atreus, learn — Or any of the Greeks — that thou art here." He spake: the aged king in fear awaked The herald. Hermes yoked the steeds and mules, And drave them quickly through the camp un- marked By any there. But when they reached the ford »7s Where Xanthus, progeny of Jupiter, Rol's the smooth eddies of his stream, the god Deputed for the Olympian height, and Morn In s.iffron robes o'erspread the Earth with light. »n Townward they urged the steeds, and as they went Sorrowed and wailed: the mules conveyed the dead, And they were seen by none of all the men And graceful dames of Troy save one alone. Cassandra, beautiful as Venus, stood On Pergamus, and from its height discerned «s Page 351 Book XXIV. 351 Her wither, standing on the chariot-seat, And knew the herald, him whose voice so oft Summoned the citizens, and knew the dead Stretched on a litter drawn by mules. She raised Her voice, and called to all the city thus :— B90 "O Trojan men and women, hasten forth To look on Hector, if ye e'er rejoiced To see him coming from the field alive, The pride of Troy, and all who dwell in her." She spake, and suddenly was neither man *» Nor woman left within the city bounds. Deep grief was on them all; they went to meet, Near to the gates, the monarch bringing home The dead. And first the wife whom Hector loved Rushed with his reverend mother to the car «oo As it rolled on, and, plucking out their hair, Touched with their hands the forehead of the dead, While round it pressed the multitude, and wept, And would have wept before the gates all day, Even to the set of sun, in bitter grief y0s For Hector's loss, had not the aged man Addressed the people from his chariot-seat: "Give place to me, and let the mules pass on, And ye may weep your fill when once the dead Is laid within the palace." As he spake, 910 The throng gave way and let the chariot pass; And having brought it to the royal halls, On a fair couch they laid the corse, and placed Singers beside it, leaders of the dirge, Page 352 352 The Iliad. Who sang a sorrowful, lamenting strain, s*s And all the women answered it with sobs. White-armed Andromache in both her hands Took warlike Hector's head, and over it Began the lamentation midst them all: — "Thou hast died young, my husband, leaving me In this thy home a widow, and one son, vi An infant yet. To an unhappy pair He owes his birth, and never will, I fear, Bloom into youth ; for ere that day will Troy Be overthrown, since thou, its chief defence, mt Art dead, the guardian of its walls and all Its noble matrons and its speechless babes, Yet to be carried captive far away, And I among them, in the hollow barks; And thou, my son, wilt either go with me, «*, Where thou shalt toil at menial tasks for some Pitiless master; or perhaps some Greek Will seize thy little arm, and in his rage Will hurl thee from a low^r and dash thee dead, Remembering how thy lather, Hector, slew 93s His brother, son, or father; for the hand Of Hector forced full many a Greek to bite The dust of earth. Not slow to smite was he In the fierce conflict; therefore all who dwell Within the city sorrow for his fall. »» Thou bringest an unutterable grief, O Hector, on thy parents, and on me The sharpest sorrows. Thou didst not stretch forth Page 353 Book XXIV. 353 Thy hands to me, in dying, from thy couch, Nor speak a word to comfort me, which I «s Might ever think of night and day with tears." So spake the weeping wife: the women all Mingled their wail with hers, and Hecuba Took up the passionate lamentation next:— "O Hector, thou who wert most fondly loved •,-.0 Of all my sons! While yet thou wert alive, Dear wert thou to the gods, who even now, When death has overtaken thee, bestow Such care upon thee. All my other sons Whom swift Achilles took in war he sold »ss At Samos, Imbrus, by the barren sea, And Lemnos harborless. But as for thee, When he had taken with his cruel spear Thy life, he dragged thee round and round the tomb Of his young friend, Patroclus, whom thy hand 9*, Had slain, yet raised he not by this the dead; And now thou liest in the palace here, Fresh and besprinkled as with early dew, Like one just slain with silent arrows aimed By Phoebus, bearer of the silver bow." s*s Weeping she spake, and woke in all who heard Grief without measure. Helen, last of all, Took up the lamentation, and began : — "O Hector, who wert dearest to my heart Of all my husband's brothers, — for the wife 970 Am I of godlike Paris, him whose fleet Brought me to Troy, — would I had sooner died.' w Page 354 354 The Iliad. And now the twentieth year is past since first I came a stranger from my native shore, Yet have I never heard from thee a word Of anger or reproach. And when the sons Of Priam, and his daughters, and the wives Of Priam's sons, in all their fair array, Taunted me grievously, or Hecuba Herself, — for Priam ever was to me 9*, A gracious father, — thou didst take my part With kindly admonitions, and restrain Their tongues with soft address and gentle words. Therefore my heart is grieved, and I bewail Thee and myself at once, — unhappy me! s*3 For now I have no friend in all wide Troy, — None to be kind to me: they hate me all." Weeping she spake: the mighty throng again Answered with wailing. Priam then addressed The people: "Now bring wood, ye men of Troy, s», Into the city. Let there be no fear Of ambush from the Greeks, for when of late I left Achilles at the dark-hulled barks, He gave his promise to molest no more The men of Troy till the twelfth morn shall rise." ns He spake, and speedily they yoked the mules And oxen to the wains, and came in throngs Before the city walls. Nine days they toiled To bring the trunks of trees, and when the tenth Arose to light the abodes of men, they brought «*» The corse of vidian* Hecfor from the town Page 355 Book XXIV. 355 With many tears, and laid it on the wood High up, and flung the fire to light the pile. Now when the early rosy-fingered Dawn Looked forth, the people gathered round the pile i0«s Of glorious Hector. When they all had come Together, first they quenched the funeral fires, Wherever they had spread, with dark-red wine, And then his brothers and companions searched For the white bones. In sorrow and in tears, 1010 That streaming stained their cheeks, they gathered them, And placed them in a golden um. O'er this They drew a covering of soft purple robes, And laid it in a hollow grave, and piled Fragments of rock above it, many and huge. «s In haste they reared the tomb, with sentries set On every side, lest all too soon the Greeks Should come in armor to renew the war. When now the tomb was built, the multitude Returned, and in the halls where Priam dwelt «»» Nursling of Jove, were feasted royally. Such was the mighty Hector's burial rite.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
