<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"/>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-14" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>THE mighty uproar was not unperceived By Nestor's ear, who, sitting at the wine, Addressed the son of /Esculapius thus : — "Noble Machaon, what will happen now? Bethink thee: for the clamor grows more loud From our young warriors at the ships. Stay here And drink the purple wine, while for thy limbs The fair-haired Hecamede warms the bath And washes the dark blood away, and I Will climb the watch-tower, and will know the worst. He spake, and took a buckler, fairly wrought, Glittering with brass, and left within the tent By Thrasymedes, his own knightly son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who to the war had borne his father's shield; He grasped a ponderous spear, with brazen blade, 1s And stood without the tent, and saw a sight Of shame, — the routed Greeks, and close behind The haughty Trojans putting them to flight, And the Greek wall o'erthrown. As when the face Of the great deep grows dark with weltering waves, That silently forbode the swift descent »• Of the shrill blast, the yet uncertain seas Roll not to either side, till from the seat Of Jupiter comes down the violent wind,— So paused the aged chief, uncertain yet »s Of purpose, — whether he should join the throng Of Greeks, with their swift coursers, or repair To sovereign Agamemnon, Atreus' son. This to his thought seemed wiser, and he went To seek Atrides. Meantime both the hosts v, Urged on the work of slaughter ; still they fought, And still the solid brass upon their limbs Rang, smitten with the swords and two-edged spears. Then, coming from the fleet, the wounded kings, Nurslings of Jove, met Nestor; toward him came is Tydides, and Ulysses, and the son Of Atreus, Agamemnon. On the beach Of the gray deep their ships were ranged afar From that fierce conflict. There the Greeks had drawn, *» To the plain's edge, the first that touched the land, And built a rampart at their sterns. Though long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shore-line, it sufficed not to contain The galleys, and the host had scanty room; Wherefore they drew the galleys up in rows, Row behind row, and filled the shore's wide mou Between the promontories. There the kings Walked, leaning on their lances, to behold The tumult and the fight, and inly grieved. The sight of aged Nestor startled them, And thus the royal Agamemnon spake :— "Neleian Nestor, glory of the Greeks, Why hast thou left the murderous fray, and why Come hither? Much I fear the fiery chief, Hector, will make the menace good which once He uttered, speaking to the men of Troy,— Not to return to Ilium from the fleet Till he had burned our ships with fire, and slain Us also; thus he spake, and now fulfils His menace. O ye gods ! the other Greeks, And not Achilles only, cherish hate Against me in their hearts, and now refuse To combat even where our galleys lie." And Nestor, the Gerenian knight, replied :— "Thus is the threat accomplished, nor can Jove The Thunderer reverse the event. The wall In which we trusted as impregnable, Our fleet's defence and ours, is overthrown; But obstinately still the Greeks maintain The combat at the ships, nor couldst thou now Distinguish with thy sharpest sight where most</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ranks are routed, so confusedly They fall, and the wild uproar reaches heaven. Meantime consult we what may yet be done, If counsel aught avail; yet can I not Advise to mingle in the strife again. 75 It is not meet that wounded men should fight." And then the royal Agamemnon said :— "Since at our ships, beneath their very sterns, The combat rages; since the wall we built Avails not, nor the trench, at which the Greeks *, Labored and suffered, hoping it might be A sure defence for us and for our fleet, Certain it is that to Almighty Jove It hath seemed good that here the Greeks, afar From Argos, should be shamefully cut off; «s For well was I aware when he designed To aid the Greeks, and well can I perceive That he is honoring now the men of Troy Like to the blessed gods, and fettering Our valor and our hands. Hear my advice, w, And follow it. Let us draw down the ships Nearest the sea, and launch them on the deep, And moor them, anchored, till the lonely night Shall come, when, if the Trojans pause from war, Haply we may draw down the other barks; «s For he who flees from danger, even by night, Deserves no blame; and better is his fate Who flees from harm than his whom harm o'ertakes." Then wise Ulysses, with stern look, replied:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"What words, Atrides, have escaped thy lips? ,90 Unhappy man, thou shouldst have held command O'er some effeminate army, and not ours,— Ours to whom Jupiter, from youth to age, Hith granted to accomplish difficult wars, Until we pass away. And wouldst thou then ,« Depart from Troy, the city of broad streets, For which we have endured so much and Ion"? Nay, be thou silent, lest the other Greeks Hear words that never should be said by one Who knows to speak with wisdom, and who bears no The sceptre, and who rules so many Greeks As thou dost. I contemn with my whole soul The counsel thou hast given, commanding us, While yet the battle rages, to draw down Our good ships to the sea, that so the foe «s May see his wish more easily fulfilled, Even in the hour of triumph, and our fate Be certain ruin; for the Greeks no more Will combat when they draw their galleys down, But, looking backward to the shore, will leave ,*, The battle there ; and thus, O king of men! Will mischief flow from what thou counsellest." And Agamemnon, king of men, rejoined :— "Thou touchest me, Ulysses, to the heart With thy harsh censure; yet I did not give "s Command to drag our good ships to the sea, Against the will of the Greeks. And would there were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some other, young or old, to counsel them More prudently, for that would please me well." Then spake the great in battle, Diomed : — 130 "The man is here, nor have ye far to look If ye will be persuaded, and refrain To blame me angrily, because my years Are fewest midst you all. I too can boast Of noble birth; my father, Tydeus, lies ,« Buried beneath a mound of earth at Thebes. To Portheus three illustrious sons were born, Who dwelt in Pleuron, and in Calydon The lofty, — Agrius, Melas, and the knight, My father's father, (Eneus, eminent no Among the rest for valor; he remained At home, but, wandering thence, my father went To Argos, for the will of Jove was such, — Jove and the other gods. He wedded there A daughter of Adrastus, and he dwelt «s Within a mansion filled with wealth ; broad fields Fertile in corn were his, and many rows Of trees and vines around him ; large his flocks, And great his fame as one expert to wield, Beyond all other Greeks, the spear in war. ,s» This should ye know, for this is true; nor yet Contemn my counsel given with careful thought And for your good, nor deem it comes from one Unwarlike and low-born. Now let us join The battle, wounded as we are, for much 1ss It needs our presence, keeping carefully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the reach of weapons, to avoid Wound upon wound, and, cheering on the rest, Send back into the combat those who stand Apart, indulgent to their weariness." «so He spake: they hearkened, and with hasty steps Went on, King Agamemnon at their head. Nor was the glorious power that shakes the earth Unmindful of his charge. He went among The warriors in the semblance of a man 1«s Stricken in years, and, seizing the right hand Of Agamemnon, spake these winged words: — "O son of Atreus, the revengeful heart Of Peleus' son must leap within his breast For joy, to see the slaughter and the rout i7» Of the Achaians, since with him there dwells No touch of pity. May he perish too, Like us, and may some god o'erwhelm his name With infamy. With thee the blessed gods Are not so far incensed, and thou shalt see 17s The Trojan chiefs and princes of their host Raising the dust-clouds on the spacious plain In fleeing from our ships and tents to Troy." He spake, and, shouting, strode across the field. As loud a cry as from nine thousand men, ,» Or from ten thousand hurrying to engage In battle, such the cry that ocean's king Uttered from his deep lungs. It woke anew Invincible resolve in every heart Among the Greeks to combat to the end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, Juno of the golden throne beheld As, standing on the Olympian height, she cast Downward her eyes to where her brother moved, Bearing his part with glory in the fray; And inly she rejoiced. She also saw 190 Jove on the peak of Ida, down whose side Glide many brooks, and greatly was displeased. Then the majestic goddess with large eyes Mused how to occupy the mind of him Who bears the aegis. This at length seemed best: To deck herself in fair array, and haste To Ida, that the God might haply yield To amorous desire, and in that hour Her hand might pour into his lids, and o'er His watchful mind, a soft and pleasant sleep. «o She went to her own chamber, which her son Vulcan had framed, with massive portals made Fast to the lintels by a secret bolt, Which none but she could draw. She entered in And closed the shining doors ; and first she took *,s Ambrosial water, washing every stain From her fair limbs, and smoothed them with rich oil. Ambrosial, soft, and fragrant, which, when touched Within Jove's brazen halls, perfumed the air Of earth and heaven. When thus her shapely form Had been anointed, and her hands had combed Her tresses, she arranged the lustrous curls, Ambrosial, beautiful, that clustering hung Round her immortal brow. And next she threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around her an ambrosial robe, the work «s Of Pallas, all its web embroidered o'er With forms of rare device. She fastened it Over the breast with clasps'of gold, and then She passed about her waist a zone which bore Fringes an hundred-fold, and in her ears « She hung her three-gemmed ear-rings, from whose gleam She won an added grace. Around her head The glorious goddess drew a flowing veil, Just from the loom, and shining like the sun; And, last, beneath her bright white feet she bound The shapely sandals. Gloriously arrayed »*, In all her ornaments, she left her bower, And calling Venus to herself, apart From all the other gods, addressed her thus : — "Wilt thou, dear child, comply with what I ask? Or, angered that I aid the Greeks, while thou n, Dost favor Troy, wilt thou deny my suit?" And thus Jove's daughter, Venus, made reply : — "O Juno, whom I reverence, speak thy thought, Daughter of mighty Saturn ! for my heart »ss Commands me to obey thy wish in all That I can do, and all that can be done." And thus imperial Juno, planning guile, Rejoined: "Give me the charm and the desire With which thou overcomest gods and men. »• I go to the far end of this green earth, . To visit Ocean, father of the gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Mother Tethys, who, receiving me From Rhea, cherished me, and brought me up In their abodes, when Jove the Thunderer «4s Cast Saturn down to lie beneath the earth And barren sea. I go to visit them, And end their hateful quarrel. For too long Have they been strangers to the marriage-bed. But if my words persuade them, and bring back »s0 Their hearts to their old love, my name will be Honored by them, and dear throughout all time." And laughter-loving Venus answered thus: — "What thou desirest should not be denied, And shall not, for thou sleepest in the arms «ss Of Jupiter, the mightiest of the gods." She spake, and from her bosom drew the zone, Embroidered, many-colored, and mstinct With every winning charm — with love, desire, Dalliance, and gentle speech —that stealthily *° O'ercomes the purpose of the wisest mind, And, placing it in Juno's hands, she said : — "This many-colored zone, and all that dwells Within it, take, and in thy bosom hide, And thou, I deem, wilt not return and leave ««s Thy purpose unfulfilled." As thus she spake, The large-eyed stately Juno smiled and took, And, smiling, in her bosom placed the zone, While Venus, daughter of the Thunderer, Went to the palace. Juno took her way k, From high Olympus o'er Pieria's realm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rich Emathia, o'er equestrian Thrace, With snowy peaks exceeding high; her feet Touched not the ground. From Athos suddenly She stooped upon the tossing deep, and came To Lemnos, seat of Thoas the divine. And there she met Death's brother, Sleep, and took His hand in hers, and thus accosted him :— "O Sleep, whose sway is over all the gods And all mankind, if ever thou didst heed My supplication, hearken to me now, And I shall be forever grateful. Close The glorious eyes of Jove beneath his lids Midst our embracings, and for thy reward Thou shalt possess a sumptuous throne of gold ,«s Imperishable. Vulcan, my lame son, Shall forge it for thee, and adorn its sides, And place below a footstool, upon which Thy shining feet shall rest in banqueting." Then gentle Sleep made answer, speaking thus :— "Great Saturn's daughter, Juno the august, «. On any other of the deathless gods Could I bring slumber, — even on the tides Of the swift Ocean, parent of them all; Yet may I not approach Saturnian Jove ,m If he command me not. Already once He made me quail with fright before his threats, When his magnanimous son, Alcides, sailed From Troy, which he had ravaged. Then I lulled The senses of the ^Egis-bearer, Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrapping myself around him, while thy mind Was planning mischiefs for his son, and thou Didst wake the blasts of all the bitter winds To sweep the ocean, and to bear away The hero on its billows from his friends 30s To populous Cos. When Jupiter awoke His anger rose ; he seized and flung the gods Hither and thither; me he chiefly sought, And would have cast me to destruction, down From the great heavens into the deep, if Night, 310 Whose power o'ercomes the might of gods and mcn, Had not preserved me, fleeing to her shade. So Jove refrained, indignant as he was, For much he feared to offend the swift-paced Night. And now thou bid'st me tempt my fate again." 31s Imperial, large-eyed Juno thus rejoined : — "Why rise such thoughts, O Sleep, within thy heart? Deem'st thou that Jove the Thunderer favors Troy As much as he was angered for the sake Of Hercules, his son? Do what I ask, *,» And thou shalt have from me a wedded spouse. One of the younger Graces shall be thine, — Pasithea, whom thou hast desired so long" She spake, and Sleep, delighted, answered thus : — "Swear now to me, O goddess, by the Styx, » The inviolable river. Lay one hand Upon the food-producing earth, and place Thc other on the glimmering; sea, that all The gods below, round Saturn, may attest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy promise, — that thou wilt bestow on me 3j» One of the younger Graces for my bride, — Pasithea, whom I have desired so long." He spake, and white-armed Juno willingly Complied ; she took the oath, and called on all The gods who dwell in Tartarus below, bs And bear the name of Titans. When the oath Was taken, and the accustomed rites performed, From Lemnos and from Imbrus forth they went, Shrouded in mist; and swiftly moving on Toward Ida, seamed with rivulets and nurse y» Of savage beasts, they came to Lectos first, And there they left the sea. Their way was now Over the land, and underneath their feet The forest summits shook. Sleep halted there Ere yet the eye of Jupiter descried us His coming, and upon a lofty fir, The tallest growing on the Idaean mount, High in the air among the clouds of heaven, Springing from earth, he took his perch within The screen of branches, like the shrill-voiced bird, Called Chalcis by the immortals, and by men 3s, Cymindis, haunting the high mountain-side. And Juno hastened on to Gargarus, The peak of lofty Ida. Jupiter, The Cloud-compeller, saw her, and at once Love took possession of his mighty heart, As when they first were wedded, and withdrew From their dear parents' sight. The God drew near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stood before her, and addressed her thus :— "Why art thou hastening from Olympus thus, And whither; yet without thy steeds and car?" And Juno answered with dissembled guile : — "To the far ends of the green earth I go, To visit Ocean, father of the gods, And Mother Tethys, in whose palace halls They nourished me, and brought me up. I go To end their hateful quarrels, for too long Have they been strangers to the marriage-bed, Incensed against each other. Now my steeds, Waiting to bear me over land and sea, Stand at the foot of Ida seamed with rills, And now I come to thee, lest thou perchance Be wroth if I unknown to thee repair To where old Ocean dwells amid his deeps." The Cloud-compeller, Jupiter, rejoined :— "Hereafter, Juno, there will be a time For such a journey ; meantime let us give This hour to rest and dalliance. Never yet Did love of goddess or of mortal maid Possess and overcome my he.art as now; Not even when I loved Ixion's dame, Who bore Pirithous, prudent as a god Among the counsellors ; nor when I loved Acrisius' daughter with the dainty feet, Danae, who brought forth Perseus, eminent Above the other warrior-chiefs; nor when I carried off from Phoenix the renowned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His daughter, who bore Minos afterward, And Rhadamanthus. Never so I loved Semele, nor Alcmena who in Thebes Brought forth to me the great-souled Hercules, My valiant son, while Bacchus, the delight Of men, was born of Semele; nor yet So loved I Ceres, fair-haired queen, nor yet Latona, gloriously beautiful, Nor even thee, as now I love, and yield My spirit to the sweetness of desire." Imperial Juno artfully replied :— "Importunate Saturnius, what is this That thou hast said? If on this summit height Of Ida we recline, where all around Is open to the sight, how will it be Should any of the ever-living gods Behold us sleeping, and to all the rest Declare it? I could never, rising thence, Enter again thy palace, save with shame. Yet if thou truly speakest thy desire, Thou hast a marriage-chamber of thine own, Which Vulcan, thy beloved son, for thee Framed, fitting to its posts the solid doors; And thither let us go to take our rest Within it, since thou hast declared thy will." Then spake again the Cloud-compeller Jove: "O Juno! fear thou not that any god Or man will look upon us. I shall throw A golden cloud around us, which the Sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself cannot look through, although his eye Is piercing, far beyond all other eyes." The son of Saturn spake, and took his wife Into his arms, while underneath the pair »™ The sacred Earth threw up her freshest herbs, — The dewy lotus, and the crocus-flower, And thick and soft the hyacinth. All these Upbore them from the ground. Upon this couch They lay, while o'er them a bright golden cloud «s Gathered, and shed its drops of glistening dew. So slumbered on the heights of Gargarus The All-Father, overcome by sleep and love, And held his consort in his arms. Meanwhile The gentle Sleep made haste to seek the fleet 4*, Of Greece. He bore a message to the god Neptune, who shakes the shores, and, drawing near, He thus accosted him with winged words :— "Now, Neptune, give the Greeks thy earnest aid, And though it be but for a little space, 43s While Jupiter yet slumbers, let them win The glory of the day; for I have wrapt His senses in a gentle lethargy, To which he is betrayed by Juno's wiles." He spake, and took his way, departing thence 4*, Among the tribes of men. These words inflamed The god's desire to aid the Greeks; he sprang Far on among the foremost, and exclaimed : — "O Greeks! do ye again submit to yield The victory to Hector, Priam's son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he may seize our fleet and bear away The glory of the day? This is his hope, And this his boast, since now Achilles lies Inactive at his ships, in sullen wrath. Yet little should we need him, if the rest «0 Stood bravely by each other. Hear me now, And do what I advise. Let all of us, The best and bravest, bearing shields, and capped With glittering helms, and wielding in our hands The longest spears, advance, and I will lead «s The charge ; nor do I think that Hector, son Of Priam, daring as he seems, will yet Abide our onset. Whoso has the heart To make a stand with me, and yet who bears A narrow shield, let it be given to one Less warlike, and a broader shield be found." He spake; they hearkened and obeyed. The kings Tydides, and Ulysses, and the son Of Atreus, Agamemnon, though their wounds 4M Still galled them, marshalled and reviewed the ranks, And changed their arms ; they made the braver wear The better armor, and the worse they gave To the less warlike. Now, when o'er their breasts The burnished mail was girded, they began *&gt; Their march ; the great earth-shaker, Neptune, led The onset, grasping in his sinewy hand A sword of fearful length and flashing blade, Like lightning. No man dared encounter it In combat; every arm was stayed by fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right opposite, illustrious Hector ranged 47s His Trojans. Dark-haired Neptune and the son Of Priam no.v engaged in desperate strife, One on the side of Troy, and one for Greece. The sea swelled upward toward the Grecian tents And fleet, while both the armies flung themselves 4* Against each other with a loud uproar. Not with such noise the ocean-billows lash The mainland, when the violent north wind Tumbles them shoreward ; not with such a noise Roar the fierce flames within the mountain glen, 4«s When leaping upward to consume the trees; And not so loudly howls the hurricane Among the lofty branches of the oaks When in its greatest fury, as now rose The din of battle from the hosts that rushed «0 Against each other with terrific cries. At Ajax glorious Hector cast his spear, As face to face they stood. It missed him not. But struck him where two belts upon his breast O'erlapped each other, — that which held the shield And that which bore the silver-studded sword. «* These saved the tender muscles. Hector, vexed That thus his weapon should have flown in vain, Retreated toward his comrades, shunning death. As he drew back, the Telamonian hurled s0» A stone, — for stones in multitude, that propped The galleys, lay around, and rolled among The feet of those who struggled. One of these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lifted, smiting Hector on the breast, Above the buckler's orb and near the neck. s0i He sent it spinning like a top ; it fell And whirled along the ground. As when beneath The stroke of Father Jupiter an oak Falls broken at the root, and from it fumes A stifling smell of sulphur, and the heart s" Of him who stands and sees it sinks with dread, — For fearful is the bolt of mighty Jove, — So dropped the valiant Hector to the earth Amid the dust; his hand let fall the spear; His shield and helm fell with him, and his mail vs Of shining brass clashed round him. Then the Greeks Rushed toward him, yelling fiercely, for they hoped To drag him thence; and many a lance they cast; But none by javelin or by thrust could wound The shepherd of the people, for there came s*, Around him all the bravest of his host, — Polydamas, ^Fineas, and the great Agenor, and Sarpedon, he who led The Lycian bands, and Glaucus the renowned; These flung themselves into the strife, while none » Of all the rest refrained, but firmly held Their broad round shields before him. Then his friends Lifted him in their arms, and bore him off, Out of the conflict, to his fiery steeds That waited for him in the battle's rear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With charioteer and sumptuous car; and these Bore him to Ilium, sorely suffering. But when they now had reached the crossing-place Of Xanthus, full of eddies, pleasant stream, The progeny of ever-living Jove, s35 They lifted out the hero from the car, And laid him on the ground, and on him poured Water, at which his breath and sight returned. He sat upon his knees, and from his throat Gave forth the purple blood, and then he fell Back to the ground, and darkness veiled his eyes, For still his senses felt the stunning blow. The Greeks saw Hector leave the field, and pressed The foe more hotly, and bethought themselves Of their old valor. Then the swift of foot, $4s Oilean Ajax, darted to the van, And with his fir-tree spear smote Satnius, son Of Enops, whom a Naiad eminent For beauty among all the nymphs brought forth To Enops, when on Satnio's banks he kept ss, His flocks. Oileus' son, expert to wield The spear, drew near, and pierced him in the flank. Prostrate he fell, and suddenly the Greeks And Trojans gathered round in desperate fray. Polydamas, the mighty spearman, son ss5 Of Panthoiis, coming to avenge him, smote On the right shoulder Prothoenor, son Of Areilochus. The pitiless spear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passed through, and falling in the dust he grasped The earth with dying hands. Polydamas s*, Shouted aloud, exulting over him :— "Not vainly, as I think, hath flown the spear From the strong hand of the magnanimous son Of Panthoiis. Some Achaian hath received The weapon in his side, to lean upon s«s In going down to Pluto's dim abode." He spake ; the Achaians chafed to hear his boast, And most the warlike son of Telamon; For the slain Greek fell near him. Instantly, Just as the Trojan moved away, he hurled s7» His shining lance. Polydamas, to escape The death-stroke, sprang aside. Archilochus, Antenor's son, received the blow: the gods Had doomed him to be slain. It pierced the spine Where the head joins the neck, and severed there s7s The tendons on each side. His head and mouth And nostrils struck the ground before his knees. And thus to excellent Polydamas Did Ajax shout in turn : " Bethink thee now, And tell me truly, was not this a man se0 Worthy to die for Prothoenor's sake? No man of mean repute or meanly born He seems, but either brother to the knight Antenor, or his son ; for certainly His looks declare him of Antenor's race." sss He spake ; but well he knew the slain. Meanwhile The Trojans heard and grieved. Then Acamas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stalking around his fallen brother, slew Promachus, the Boeotian, with his spear, While dragging off the dead man by the feet. s» Then o'er the fallen warrior, Acamas Boasted aloud : "O measureless in threats! Bowmen of Argos! not to us alone Shall woe and mourning come ; ye also yet Will perish. See your Promachus o'erthrown, sx And by my spear, that so my brother's death May not be unrequited. Every man Should wish a brother left to avenge his fall." He ended, and the Greeks were vexed to hear His boast; the brave Peneleus most of all Was angered, and he rushed on Acamas, Who waited not the onset of the king, And in his stead was Ilioneus slain, The son of Phorbas, who was rich in flocks, Whom Mercury, of all the sons of Troy, a* Loved most, and gave him ample wealth ; his wife Brought Ilioneus forth, and only him; And him Peneleus smote beneath the brow In the eye's socket, forcing out the ball; ^ The spear passed through, and reappeared behind. Down sat the wounded man with arms outstretched, While, drawing his sharp sword, Peneleus smote The middle of his neck, and lopped away The helmed head, which fell upon the ground, The spear still in the eye. He lifted it 6•s As one would lift a poppy up, and thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shouted, boasting, to the Trojan host :— "Go now, ye Trojans, and mform from me The father and the mother of the slain That they may mourn within their palace walls s» Illustrious Ilioneus. After this Shall the sad wife of Promachus, the son Of Alegenor, never hasten forth To meet her husband with glad looks, when we The Greeks return from Ilium with our fleet." He spake; the Trojans all grew pale with fear, And gazed around for an escape from death. Say, Muses, ye who on the Olympian height Inhabit, who was first among the Greeks To gather bloody spoil, when now the power «*, That shakes the shores had turned the tide of war. First, Ajax, son of Telamon, struck down Hyrtius, the leader of the Mysian band, And son of Gyrtias, while Antilochus Spoiled Mermerus and Phalces. Morys next, «is Slain by the weapon of Meriones, Fell with Hippotion. Teucer overthrew Prothoiis and Periphoetes. Atreus' son Smote Hyperenor, prince among his tribe, Upon the flank ; the trenchant weapon drank The entrails, and the soul, driven forth, escaped Through the deep wound, and darkness veiled his eyes. But Ajax swift of foot, Oi'.cu;' son, O'erthrew the most, for none could equ-1 him In swift pursuit when Jove ordained a flijht.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
