<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 20</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"/>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-20" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>THUS, O Pelides, did the sons of Greece, Impatient for the battle, arm themselves, By their beaked ships, around thee. Opposite, Upon a height that rose amidst the plain, The Trojans waited. Meantime Jupiter s Sent Themis from the Olympian summit, ploughed With dells, to summon all the immortal ones To council. Forth she went from place to place, Bidding them to the palace halls of Jove. Then none of all the Rivers failed to join •,• The assembly, save Oceanus, and none Of all the Nymphs were absent whose abode Is in the pleasant groves and river-founts And grassy meadows. When they reached the halls Of cloud-compelling Jove they sat them down .s On shining thrones, divided each from each By polished columns, wrought for Father Jove By Vulcan's skill. Thus all to Jove's abode N Page 210 2IO The Iliad. Were gathered. Neptune had not disobeyed The call. He left the sea, and took his seat « Among them, and inquired the will of Jove. "Why, wielder of the lightning, dost thou call The gods again to council? Do thy plans Concern the Greeks and Trojans? For the war Between their hosts will be rekindled soon." »s And thus the Cloud-compeller Jove replied: "Thou who dost shake the shores, thou knowest well The purpose of my mind, and for whose sake I call this council. Though so soon to die, They are my care. Yet will I keep my place, *, Seated upon the Olympian mount, and look Calmly upon the conflict. All of you Depart, and aid the Trojans or the Greeks, As it may list you. For should Peleus' son Alone do battle with the men of Troy, 33 Their squadrons could not stand before the assault Of the swift-footed warrior for an hour. Beforetime, at the sight of him they fled, O'ercome with fear, and now, when he is roused To rage by his companion's death, I fear » Lest, though it be against the will of fate, He level with the ground the walls of Troy." Saturnius spake, and moved the hosts to join In desperate conflict. All the gods went forth To mingle with the war on different sides. « Juno and Pallas hastened to the fleet Page 211 Book XX. 211 With Neptune, he who makes the earth to shake, And Hermes, god of useful arts, and shrewd In forecast. Vulcan also went with them, Strong and stern-eyed, yet lame, his feeble legs s» Moviug with labor. To the Trojan side Went crested Mars, Apollo with his locks Unshorn, Diana mighty with the bow, Latona, Xanthus, and the Queen of smiles, Venus; for while the gods remained apart 5s From men, the Achaian host was high in hope Because Achilles, who so long had left The war, now reappeared upon the field, And terror shook the limbs of every son Of Troy when he beheld the swift of foot, «° Pelides, terrible as Mars — that curse Of human-kind — in glittering arms again. But when the dwellers of Olympus joined The crowd of mortals, Discord, who makes mad The nations, rose and raged; Minerva raised «s Her war-cry from the trench without the wall, And then she shouted from the sounding shore; While, like a cloudy whirlwind, opposite, Moved Mars, and fiercely yelled, encouraging The men of Troy, as on the city heights 70 He stood, or paced with rapid steps the hill Beside the Simo s, called the Beautiful. Thus, kindling hate between the hosts, the gods Engaged, and hideous was the strife that rose Among them. From above, with terrible crash, n Page 212 The Iliad. Thundered the father of the blessed gods And mortal men, while Neptune from below Shook the great earth and lofty mountain peaks. Then watery Ida's heights and very roots, The city of Troy, and the Greek galleys, quaked. «- Then Pluto, ruler of the nether world, Leaped from his throne in terror, lest the god Who makes the earth to tremble, cleaving it Above him, should lay bare to gods and men His horrible abodes, the dismal haunts «s Which even the gods abhor. Such tumult filled The field of battle when the immortals joined The conflict. Then against King Neptune stood Phoebus Apollo, with his winged shafts, And Pallas, goddess of the azure eyes, 90 Confronted Mars. Encountering Juno came The sister of Apollo, archer-queen And huntress, Dian of the golden bow. The helpful Hermes, god of useful arts, Opposed Latona, and the mighty stream ss Called Xanthus by the immortals, but by men Scamander, with his eddies strong and deep, Stood face to face with Vulcan in the field. So warred the gods with gods. Meantime the son Of Peleus, ranging through the thick of fight, "0 Sought only Hector, Priam's son, whose blood He meant to pour to greedy Mars, the god Of carnage. But Apollo, who impels Warriors to battle, stirred /Eneas up Page 213 Book XX. 213 To meet Pelides. First he filled his heart 10s With resolute valor, and then took the voice Of Priam's son, Lycaon. In his shape Thus spake Apollo, son of Jupiter: — "/Eneas, prince of Troy, where now are all The boasts which thou hast made before the chiefs Of Troy at banquets, that thou yet wouldst meet Pelides in the combat hand to hand?" /Eneas made reply: "Priamides, Why dost thou bid me, when thou knowest me Unwilling, meet in combat Peleus' son, us The mighty among men? It will not be For the first time if I confront him now. He chased me once from Ida with his spear, — Me and my fellows, when he took our herds And laid Lyrnessus waste and Pedasus. ,*, But Jove, who gave me strength and nimble feet, Preserved me; I had else been slain by him And by Minerva, for the goddess went Before him, giving him the victory And moving him to slay the Leleges »s And Trojans with the brazen spear he bore. 'T is not for mortal man to fight the son Of Peleus, at whose side there ever stands One of the immortal gods, averting harm. And then his weapon flies right on, nor stops ,*, Until it bites the flesh. Yet were the god To weigh the victory in an equal scale, Achilles would not vanquish me with ease, Page 214 214 The Iliad. Though he might boast his frame were all of brass." Then spake the king Apollo, son of Jove: 13s "Pray, warrior, to the eternal gods. They say That Venus gave thee birth, who has her own From Jove. His mother is of lower rank Than thine. Thine is a child of Jove, but his A daughter of the Ancient of the Deep. ,» Strike at him with that conquering spear of thine, Nor let him scare thee with stern words and threats." He said, and breathed into the prince's breast Fresh valor, as, arrayed in glittering arms, He pressed to where the foremost warriors fought; Yet not unseen by Juno's eye went forth u« The son of old Anchises. She convened The gods in council, and addressed them thus : — "Neptune and Pallas, what shall now be done? Consider ye. ^Eneas, all arrayed is» In glittering arms, is pressing on to meet Pelides. Phoebus sends him. Let us join To turn him back, or let some one of us Stand near Achilles, fill his limbs with strength, Nor let his heart grow faint, but let him see &gt;« That we, the mightiest of the immortals, look On him with favor, and that those who strive Amid the war and bloodshed to protect The sons of Troy are empty boasters all. For this we came from heaven to interpose i, In battle, that Achilles may endure No harm from Trojan hands, although, no doubt, Page 215 Book XX. 215 Hereafter he must suffer all that Fate Spun for him when his mother brought him forth. But if he hear not, from some heavenly voice, 1«s Of this assurance, fear may fall on him When, haply, in the battle he shall meet Some god; for when revealed to human sight The presence of the gods is terrible." And then did Neptune, he who shakes the earth, Make answer: "Juno, it becomes thee ill ,71 To be so greatly vexed. I cannot wish A contest with the other gods, though we In power excel them. Rather let us sit Apart, where we can look upon the war, 171 And leave it to mankind. And yet if Mars Or Phoebus should begin the fight, or seek To thwart Achilles or restrain his arm, There will be cause for us to join the strife In earnest, and I deem that they full soon, ,, The contest ended, will return to join The assembled gods upon the Olympian mount, Forced to withdraw by our all-potent hands." So spake the dark-haired god, and led the way To the high mound of godlike Hercules, i«s Raised from the earth by Trojans, with the aid Of Pallas, that the hero there might find A refuge when the monster of the deep Should chase him from the sea-beach to the plain. With other gods beside him Neptune there ,*, Sat down and drew a shadow, which no sight Page 216 2l6 The Iliad. Could pierce, around their shoulders. Other gods, Upon the hill called Beautiful, were grouped Round thee, Apollo, archer-god, and Mars, Spoiler of cities. On both sides they sat, us Devising plans, unwilling to begin The fierce encounter, though Almighty Jove From where he sat in heaven commanded it. The warriors thronged into the field, which shone With brazen armor and caparisons - »90 Of steeds; earth trembled with the sounding tramp Of marching squadrons. From the opposing ranks Two chieftains, each the bravest of his host, Impatient to engage, — Anchises' son, ^Eneas, and the great Achilles, — came. »,s And first ^Eneas, with defiant mien And nodding casque, stood forth. He held his shield Before him, which he wielded right and left, And shook his brazen spear. On the other side, Pelides hurried toward him, terrible »,» As is a lion, which the assembled hinds Of a whole village chase and seek to slay, While on he stalks, contemning their assault; But if the arrow of some strong-armed youth Have smitten him, he stands, and gathers all «s His strength to spring, with open jaws and leeth Half hid in foam, and uttering fearful growls From his deep chest; he lashes with his tail His sides and sinewy thighs to rouse himself To combat, and then, grimly frowning, leaps «0 Page 217 Book XX. 217 To slay, or by the foremost youths be slain, So sprang Achilles, moved by his bold heart To meet the brave /Eneas. As the twain Drew near each other, the swift-footed chief, The great Achilles, was the first to speak : — »s "Why, O /Eneas, hast thou come so far Through this vast crowd to seek me? Does thy heart Bid thee confront me in the hope to gain The place which Priam holds, and to bear rule Over the knights Oi Troy? Yet shouldst thou take My life, think not that Priam in thy hand asi Will place such large reward. He has his sons, Nor is he fickle, but of stable mind. Or will the Trojans, if thou slayest me, Bestow on thee broad acres, of a soil m Fruitful exceedingly, and suited well To vines or to the plough, which thou mayst till That also, as I hope, thou wilt obtain With difficulty; for, unless I err, I forced thee once to flee before my spear. «*, Dost thou remember, when thou wert alone Among thy beeves, I drave thee, running fast, Down Ida's steeps? Then didst thou never turn To face me, but didst seek a hiding-place Within Lyrnessus, which I also took «s And wasted, with the aid of Father Jove And Pallas. From the town I led away The women, never to be free again. vol. 11. 10 Page 218 218 The Iliad. Jove and the other gods protected thee That day. Yet will they not protect thee now, «s» As thou dost vainly hope. Withstand me not, I counsel thee, but hide thyself among The crowd before thou suffer harm, for he Who sees past evils only is a fool." And then /Eneas answered: "Do not think, »ss Pelides, with such words to frighten me, As if I were a beardless boy. I too Might use reproach and taunt; but well we know Each other's birth and lineage, through report Of men, although by sight I know not thine, Nor know'st thou mine. They say that thou art sprung From Peleus the renowned, and from the nymph Of ocean, fair-haired Thetis, while I boast My birth from brave Anchises, and can claim Venus as mother. Two of these to-day *s Must weep the death of a beloved son, For we are not to part, I think, nor end The combat after a few childish words; Yet let me speak, that thou mayst better know Our lineage, known already far and wide. »70 Jove was the father, cloud-compelling Jove, Of Dardanus, by whom Dardania first Was peopled, ere our sacred Troy was built On the great plain, — a populous town ; for men Dwelt still upon the roots of Ida fresh *n With many springs. To Dardanus was born Page 219 Book XX. 219 King Erichthonius, richest in his day Of mortal men, and in his meadows grazed Three thousand mares, exulting in their brood Of tender foals. Of some of this vast herd »*, Boreas became enamored as they fed. He came to them in likeness of a steed That wore an azure mane, and they brought forth Twelve foals, which all were females, of such speed That when they frolicked on the teeming earth *&gt;s They flew along the topmost ears of wheat And broke them not, and when they sported o'er The mighty bosom of the deep they ran Along the hoary summits of its waves. To Erichthonius Tros was born, who ruled *» The Trojans, and from Tros there sprang three sons Of high renown, — llus, Assaracus, And godlike Ganymede, most beautiful Of men; the gods beheld and caught him up To heaven, so beautiful was he, to pour *&gt;s The wine to Jove, and ever dwell with them. And llus had a son, Laomedon, Of mighty fame, to whom five sons were born, Tithonus, Priam, Lampus, Clytius, And Hicetaon, trained to war by Mars. y* Assaracus begat my ancestor, Capys, to whom Anchises owes his birth. Anchises is my father; Priam's son Is noble Hector. Such I claim to be My lineage and my blood; but Jove at will « Page 220 220 The Iliad. Gives in large measure, or diminishes, Men's warlike piowess; and the power of Jove Is over all. But let us talk no more Of things like these, as if we were but boys, While here in the mid-field we stand between The warring armies. Both of us might cast Reproaches at each other, many and foul, Such as no galley of a hundred oars Could bear and float. Men's tongues are voluble, And endless are the modes of speech, and far 313 Extends from side to side the field of words. Such as thou utterest it will be thy lot To hear from others. But what profits it For us to rail and wrangle, in high brawl, Like women angered to the quick, that rush s» Into the middle of the street and scold With furious words, some true and others false, As rage may prompt them? Me thou shalt not move With words from my firm purpose ere thou raise Thy arm against me. Let us hasten first *s To prove the temper of our brazen spears." He spake, and hurled his brazen spear to smite The dreadful shield, a terror in men's eyes; That mighty buckler rang with the strong blow. Achilles, as it came, held forth his shield 3* With nervous arm far from him, for he feared That the long javelin of his valiant foe Might pierce it. Idle fear; he had not thought That the bright armor given him by the gods Page 221 Book XX. 221 Not easily would yield to force of man. 33s Nor could the rapid spear that left the hand Of brave ^Eneas pierce the shield; the gold, The gift of Vulcan, stopped it. Through two folds It went, but three remained; for Vulcan's skill Fenced with five folds the disk, — the outer two w Of brass, the inner two of tin; between Was one of gold, and there the brazen spear Was stayed. And then in turn Achilles threw His ponderous spear, and struck the orbed shield Borne by ^Eneas near the upper edge, wa Where thinnest was the brass and thinnest lay The bullock's hide. The Pelian ash broke through; The buckler crashed; ^ineas, stooping low, Held it above him, terrified; the spear, Tearing both plate and hide of that huge shield, 3s0 Passed over him, and, eager to go on, Plunged in the earth and stood. He, when he saw The massive lance which he had just escaped Fixed in the earth so near him, stood awhile As struck with fear, and with despairing looks. 3ss Achilles drew his trenchant sword and rushed With fury on ^Eneas, uttering A fearful shout. ^Eneas lifted up A stone, a mighty weight, which no two men, As men are now, could raise, yet easily He wielded it. ./Eneas then, to save His threatened life, had smitten with the stone His adversary's buckler or his helm, Page 222 222 The Iliad. And with his sword Pelides had laid dead The Trojan, had not he who shakes the earth, jss Neptune, beheld him in that perilous hour, And instantly addressed the immortal gods : — "My hear', ye gods, is heavy for the sake Of the great-sauled ./Eneas, who will sink To Hades overcome by Peleus' son. a70 Rash man! he listened to the archer-god Apollo, who has now no power to save The chief from death. But, guiltless as he is, Why should he suffer evil for the wrong Of others? He has always sought to please m With welcome offerings the gods who dwell In the broad heaven. Let us withdraw him, then, From this great peril, lest, if he should fall Before Achilles, haply Saturn's son May be displeased. And't is the will of fate **, That he escape; that so the Dardan race, Beloved by Jove above all others sprung From him and mortal women, may not yet Perish from earth and leave no progeny. For Saturn's son already holds the house s«s Of Priam in disfavor, and will make ^Eneas ruler o'er the men of Troy, And his sons' sons shall rule them after him." Imperial Juno with large eyes replied: "Determine, Neptune, for thyself, and save »» ^Eneas, or, all blameless as he is, Abandon him to perish by the hand Page 223 Book XX. 223 Of Peleus' son, Achilles. We have sworn — Minerva and myself—that never we Would aid in aught the Trojans to escape m Their day of ruin, though the town of Troy Sink to the dust in the destroying flames,— Flames kindled by the warlike sons of Greece." And then did Neptune, shaker of the shores, Go forth into the battle and amidst *» The clash of spears, and come where stood the chiefs, ^Eneas and his mighty foe, the son Of Peleus. Instantly he caused to rise A darkness round the eyes of Peleus' son, And from the buckler of ^Eneas drew 40s The spear with ashen stem and brazen blade, And laid it at Achilles' feet, and next He lifted high /Eneas from the ground And bore him thence. O'er many a warrior's head, And many a harnessed steed, -Eneas flew, «io Hurled by the god, until he reached the rear Of that fierce battle, where the Caucons stood Arrayed for war. The shaker of the shores Drew near, and said to him in winged words :— "What god, ^Eneas, moved thee to defy « Madly the son of Peleus, who in might Excels thee, and is dearer to the gods? Whenever he encounters thee in arms Give way, lest thou, against the wiil of fate, Pass down to Hades. When he shall have met m Page 224 224 The Iliad. His fate and perished, thou mayst boldly dare To face the foremost of the enemy; No other of the Greeks shall take thy life. He spake, and having thus admonished him He left /Eneas there, and suddenly *,s Swept off the darkness that so thickly rose Around Achilles, who, with sight now clear, Looked forth, and, sighing, said to his great soul:— "How strange is this! My eyes have seen to-day A mighty marvel. Here the spear I flung 4*, Is lying on the earth, and him at whom I cast it, in the hope to take his life, • I see no longer. Well beloved, no doubt, Is this /Eneas by the immortal gods. Yet that, I thought, was but an empty boast «s Of his. Well, let him go; I cannot think That he who gladly fled from death will find The courage to encounter me again. And now will I exhort the Greeks to fight This battle bravely, while I go to prove «• The prowess of the other chiefs of Troy." He spake, and, cheering on the soldiery, He sprang into the ranks: "Ye noble Greeks, Avoid no more the Trojans; press right on. "Let each man single out his man, and fight «s With eager heart. T is hard for me to chase, With all my warlike might, so many men, And fight with all. Not even Mars, the god, Although immortal, nor Minerva's self, Page 225 Book XX. Could combat with so vast a multitude 4s» Unwearied; yet whatever I can do, With hands and feet and strength, I give my word Not to decline, or be remiss in aught. 1 go to range the Trojan files, where none, I think, will gladly stand to meet my spear." 4ss Such stirring words he uttered, while aloud Illustrious Hector called, encouraging The men of Troy, and promising to meet Achilles: "Valiant Trojans, do not quail Before Pelides. In the strife of words *s0 I too might bear my part against the gods; But harder were the combat with the spear, For greater is their might than ours. The son Of Peleus cannot make his threatenings good. A part will he perform and part will leave *ss Undone. I go to wait him; I would go Although his hands were like consuming flame, — His hands like flame, his strength the strength of steel." He spake: the Trojans at his stirring word Lifted their lances, and the adverse hosts 470 Joined battle with a fearful din. Then came Apollo and admonished Hector thus :— "Hector, encounter not Achilles here Before the armies, but amidst the throng And tumult of the battle, lest perchance 47s He strike thee with the javelin or the sword." He spake: the Trojan chief, dismayed to hear io• o Page 226 226 The Iliad. The wirning of the god, withdrew among The crowded ranks. Meantime Achilles sprang Upon the Trojans with a terrible cry, And slew a leader of the host, the brave Iphition, whom a Naiad, at the foot Of snowy Tmolus, in the opulent vale Of Hyda, bore to the great conqueror Of towns, Otrynteus. As he came in haste, os The noble son of Pcleus with his spear Smote him upon the forehead in the midst, And cleft the head in two. He fell; his arms Clashed, and Achilles boasted o'er him thus :—- "Son of Otrynteus, terrible in arms, r» Thou art brought low; thou meetest here thy death, Though thou wert born by the Gyga^an lake Where lie, by fishy Hyllus and the stream Of eddying Hermus, thy paternal fields." Thus boastfully he spake, while darkness came *n Over Iphition's eyes, and underneath The chariots of the Greeks who foremost fought His corse was mangled. Next Achilles smote Antenor's son, Demoleon, gallantly Breasting the onset of the Greeks. He pierced s« His temple through the helmet's brazen cheek; The brass stayed not the blow; the eager spear Brake through the bone, and crushed the brain within, And the brave youth lay dead. Achilles next Struck down Hippodamas; he pierced his back m Page 227 Book XX. 227 As, leaping from his car, the Phrygian fled Before him. With a moan he breathed away His life, as moans a bull when dragged around The altar of the Heliconian king By youths on whom the god that shakes the earth s,« Looks down well pleased. With such a moaning sound The fiery spirit left the Phrygian's frame. Then sprang Achilles with his spear to slay The godlike Polydorus, Priam's son, Whose father bade him not to join the war, ss For he was younger than the other sons, And dearest of them all. In speed of foot He had no peer. Yet, with a boyish pride To show his swiftness, in the foremost ranks He ranged the field, until he lost his life. s*, Him with a javelin the swift-footed son Of Peleus smote as he was hurrying by. The weapon pierced the middle of his back, Where, by its golden rings, the belt was clasped Above the double corselet; the keen blade s»s Came forth in front; the Trojan with a cry Fell forward on his knees, and, bending, clasped His bowels in his hands. When Hector saw His brother thus upon the earth, there came A darkness o'er his eyes, nor could he bear s» Longer to stand aloof, but, brandishing His spear, came forward like a rushing flame To meet the son of Peleus, who beheld Page 228 228 The Iliad. And bounded toward him, saying boastfully: "So, he is near whose hand hath given my heart s*, Its deepest wound, who slew my dearest friend. No more are we to shun each other now, Timidly stealing through the paths of war." And then he said to Hector with a frown: "Draw nearer, that thou mayst the sooner die." s» The crested Hertor, undismayed, replied: "Pelides, do not hope with empty words To frighten me, as if I were a boy. Insults and taunts J could with ease return. I know that thou art brave; I know that I «s In might am not thy equal ; but the event Rests in the laps of'.he great gods, and they May, though I lack thv prowess, give thy life Into my hands when I shall cast my spear. The weapon that I bear ;s keen like thine." ss» Thus having spoken, blandishing his spear, He sent it forth; but with a gentle breath Minerva turned it from thr glorious Greek, And laid it at the noble Hec'or's feet . Then did Achilles, resolute to slay sss His enemy, rush against him with a shout Of fury; but Apollo, with such nower As gods put forth, withdrew him thence, and spread A darkness round him. Thrice thf swift of foot, Achilles, rushed against him with his spear, And thrice he smote the cloud. Bui when once more, Page 229 Book XX. 229 In godlike might, he made the assault, he spake These winged words of menace and reproach : — "Hound as thou art, thou hast once more escaped Thy death; for it was near. Again the hand sss Of Phoebus rescues thee; to him thy vows Are made ere thou dost trust thyself amidst The clash of javelins. I shall meet thee yet And end thee utterly, if any god Favor me also. I will now pursue «?• And strike the other Trojan warriors down." He spake, and in the middle of the neck Smote Dryops with his spear. The Phrygian fell Before him at his feet. He left him there, And wounding with his spear Philetor's son, ys Demuchus, tall and valiant, in the knee, Stayed him until he slew him with his sword. Then from their chariot to the ground he cast Laogonus and Dardanus, the sons Of Bias, piercing with a javelin one, sso And cutting down the other with his sword. And Tros, Alastor's son, who came to him And clasped his knees, in hope that he would spare A captive, —spare his life, nor slay a-youth Of his own age, — vain hope! he little knew a That not by prayers Achilles could be moved, Nor was he pitiful, nor mild of mood. But hard of heart, — while Tros embraced his knees And passionately sued, Pelides thrust His sword into his side; the liver came ss» Page 230 230 The Iliad. Forth at the wound; the dark blood gushing filled The Phrygian's bosom; o'er his eyes there crept A darkness, and his life was at an end. Approaching Mulius next, Achilles smote The warrior at the ear; the brazen point ss Passed through the other ear; and then he slew Agenor's son, Echeclus, letting fall His heavy-hiked sword upon his head Just in the midst; the blade grew warm with blood, And gloomy death and unrelenting fate » Darkened the victim's eyes. Achilles next Wounded Deucalion, thrusting through his arm The brazen javelin, where the sinews met That strung the elbow. While with powerless arm The wounded Trojan stood awaiting death, ,*,s Achilles drave his falchion through his neck. Far flew the head and helm, the marrow flowed From out the spine, and stretched upon the ground Deucalion lay. Pelides still went on, O'ertaking Rigmus, the renowned son ««o Of Peireus, from the fruitful fields of Thrace, And smote him in the stomach with his lance. There hung the weapon fixed; the wounded man Fell from the car. At Areithous The charioteer, who turned his steeds to flee, a,s Achilles sent his murderous lance, and pierced His back, and dashed him from the car, and left His horses wild with fright. As when, among The deep dells of an arid mountain-side, Page 231 Book XXI. 231 A great fire burns its way, and the thick wood » Before it is consumed, and shifting winds Hither and thither sweep the flames, so ranged Achilles in his fury through the field From side to side, and everywhere o'ertook His victims, and the earth ran dark with blood. t*s As when a yeoman underneath the yoke Brings his broad-fronted oxen to tread out White barley on the level threshing-floor, The sheaves are quickly trodden small beneath The heavy footsteps of the bellowing beasts, So did the firm-paced coursers, which the son Of F"leus guided, trample with their feet Bucklers and corpses, while beneath the car Blood steeped the axle, and the chariot-seat Dripped on its rim with blood, that from below «» Was splashed upon them by the horses' hoofs And by the chariot-wheels. Such havoc made Pelides in his ardor for renown, Till his invincible hands were foul with blood.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
