<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"/>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-8" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>NOW morn in saffron robes had shed her light O'er all the earth, when Jove the Thunderer Summoned the gods to council on the heights Of many-peaked Olympus. He addressed The assembly, and all listened as he spake : — s "Hear, all ye gods and all ye goddesses! While I declare the thought within my breast. Let none of either sex presume to break The law I give, but cheerfully obey, That my design may sooner be fulfilled. » Whoever, stealing from the rest, shall seek To aid the Grecian cause, or that of Troy, Back to Olympus, scourged and in disgrace, Shall he be brought, or I will seize and hurl The offender down to rayless Tartarus, •s Deep, deep in the great gulf below the earth, With iron gates and threshold forged of brass, As far beneath the shades as earth from heaven. Then shall he learn how greatly I surpass All other gods in power. Try if ye will, *, Ye gods, that all may know: suspend from heaven A golden chain; let all the immortal host Cling to it from below: ye could not draw, Strive as ye might, the all-disposing Jove From heaven to earth. And yet, if I should choose To draw it upward to me, I should lift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With it and you, the earth itself and sea Together, and I then would bind the chain Around the summit of the Olympian mount, And they should hang aloft. So far my power *, Surpasses all the power of gods and men." He spake ; and all the great assembly, hushed In silence, wondered at his threatening words, Until at length the blue-eyed Pallas said : — "Our Father, son of Saturn, mightiest as Among the potentates, we know thy power Is not to be withstood, yet are we moved With pity for the warlike Greeks, who bear An evil fate and waste away in war. If such be thy command, we shall refrain - * From mingling in the combat, yet will aid The Greeks with counsel which may be their guide, Lest by thy wrath they perish utterly." The Cloud-compeller Jove replied, and smiled: — "Tritonia, daughter dear, be comforted. « I spake not in the anger of my heart, And I have naught but kind intents for thee. He spake, and to his chariot yoked the steeds, Fleet, brazen-footed, and with flowing manes Of gold, and put his golden armor on, s» And took the golden scourge, divinely wrought, And, mounting, touched the coursers with the lash To urge them onward. Not unwillingly Flew they between the earth and starry heaven, Until he came to Ida, moist with springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nurse of savage beasts, and to the height Of Gargarus, where lay his sacred field, And where his fragrant altar fumed. He checked Their course, and there the Father of the gods And men released them from the yoke and caused A cloud to gather round them. Then he sat, Exulting in the fulness of his might, Upon the summit, whence his eye beheld The towers of Ilium and the ships of Greece. Now in their tents the long-haired Greeks had shared ,* A hasty meal, and girded on their arms. The Trojans, also, in their city armed Themselves for war, as eager for the fight, Though fewer; for a hard necessity Forced them to combat for their little ones 70 And wives. They set the city-portals wide, And forth the people issued, foot and horse Together, and a mighty din arose. And now, when host met host, their shields and spears Were mingled in disorder; men of might 7s Encountered, cased in mail, and bucklers clashed Their bosses; loud the clamor: cries of pain And boastful shouts arose from those who fell And those who slew, and earth was drenched with blood. While yet't was morning, and the holy light *, Of day grew bright, the men of both the hosts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ere smitten and were slain; but when the sun Stood high in middle heaven, the All-Father took His golden scales, and in them laid the fates «« Which bring the sleep of death, — the fate of those Who tamed the Trojan steeds, and those who warred For Greece in brazen armor. By the midst He held the balance, and, behold, the fate Of Greece in that day's fight sank down until *, It touched the nourishing earth, while that of Troy Rose and flew upward toward the spacious heaven. With that the Godhead thundered terribly From Ida's height, and sent his lightnings down Among the Achaian army. They beheld In mute amazement and grew pale wilh fear. *s Then neither dared Idomeneus remain, Nor Agamemnon, on the ground, nor stayed The chieftains Ajax, ministers of Mars. Gerenian Nestor, guardian of the Greeks, Alone was left behind, and he remained «» Unwillingly. A steed of those that drew His car was sorely wounded by a shaft Which Alexander, fair-haired Helen's spouse, Sent from his bow. It pierced the forehead where The mane begins, and where a wound is death. 10s The arrow pierced him to the brain ; he reared And whirled in torture with the wound, and scared His fellow-coursers. While the aged man Hastened to sever with his sword the thongs That bound him to the car, the rapid steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hector bore their valiant master on With the pursuing crowd. The aged chief Had perished then, if gallant Diomed Had not perceived his plight. He lifted up His voice, and, shouting to Ulysses, said : — «s "High-born Ulysses, man of subtle shifts, Son of Laertes, whither dost thou flee? Why like a coward turn thy back? Beware, Lest there some weapon smite thee. Stay and guard This aged warrior from his furious foe." i»» So spake he; but the much-enduring man, Ulysses, heard not the reproof, and passed Rapidly toward the hollow ships of Greece. Tydides, single-handed, made his way Among the foremost warriors, till he stood «s Before the horses of the aged son Of Neleus, and in winged accents said : — "The younger warriors press thee sore, old chief! Thy strength gives way; the weariness of age Is on thee; thy attendant is not strong; Thy steeds are slow. Mount, then, my car, and see What Trojan horses are ; how rapidly They turn to right and left, and chase and flee. I took them from the terror of the field, ./Eneas. To our servants leave thine own, .e While we with these assault the Trojan knights, - And teach even Hector that the spear I wield Can make as furious havoc as his own." He spake; and Nestor, the Gerenian knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Complied. The two attendants, valiant men, — 1*, Sthenelus and the good Eurymedon, — Took charge of Nestor's steeds. The chieftains climbed The car of Diomed, and Nestor took Into his hand the embroidered reins and lashed The horses with the scourge. They quickly came To Hector. As the Trojan hastened on, .«s The son of Tydeus hurled a spear; it missed, But spared not Eniopeus, him who held The reins, the hero's charioteer, and son Of brave Thebaeus. In the breast between .s» The paps it smote him ; from the car he fell, And the swift horses started back; his soul And strength passed from him. Hector bitterly Grieved for his death, yet left him where he fell, And sought another fitting charioteer. 'ss Nor had the fiery coursers long to wait A guide, for valiant Archeptolemus, The son of Iphitus, was near at hand. And him he caused to mount the chariot drawn By his fleet steeds, and gave his hand the reins. ,, Then great had been the slaughter ; fearful deeds Had then been done ; the Trojans had been scared Into their town like lambs into the fold, — Had not the Father of the immortal gorls And mortal men beheld, and from on high ,sr Terribly thundered, sending to the earth A bolt of fire. He flung it down before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The car of Diomed ; and fiercely glared The blazing sulphur; both the frightened steeds Cowered trembling by the chariot. Nestor's hand Let fall the embroidered reins; his spirit sank n, With fear, and thus he said to Diomed :— "Tydides, turn thy firm-paced steeds, and flee. Dost thou not see that victory from Jove Attends thee not? To-day doth Saturn's son 173 Award the glory to the Trojan chief. Hereafter he will make it ours, if such Be his good pleasure. No man, though he be The mightiest among men, can thwart the will Of Jupiter, with whom abides all power." ,*, The great in battle, Diomed, replied :— "Truly, O ancient man, thou speakest well; But this it is that grieves me to the heart, — That Hector to the Trojan host will say, 'I put to flight Tydides, and he sought iss Shelter among his ships.' Thus will he boast Hereafter; may earth open then for me!" And Nestor, the Gerenian knight, rejoined :— "What, son of warlike Tydeus, hast thou said? Though Hector call thee faint of heart and weak, i*, The Trojans and Dardanians, and the wives Of the stout-hearted Trojans armed with shields, Whose husbands in their youthful prime thy hand Hath laid in dust, will not believe his words." Thus having said, he turned the firm-paced steeds Rearward, and mingled with the flying crowd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now the Trojans and their leader gave A mighty cry, and poured on them a storm Of deadly darts, and crested Hector raised His thundering voice and shouted after them :— *» "O son of Tydeus! the swift-riding Greeks Have honored thee beyond all other men, At banquets, with high place and delicate meats And flowing cups. They will despise thee now, For thou art like a woman. Timorous girl! 10s Take thyself hence, and never think that I Shall yield to thee, that thou mayst climb our towers And bear away our women in thy ships; For I shall give thee first the doom of death." He spake; and Diomed, in doubtful mood, »i0 Questioned his spirit whether he should turn His steeds and fight with Hector. Thrice the thought Arose within his mind, and thrice on high Uttered the all-forecasting Jupiter His thunder from the Idaean mount, a sign »is Of victory changing to the Trojan side. Then Hector to the Trojans called aloud : — "Trojans and Lycians all, and ye who close In deadly fight, the sons of Dardanus! Acquit yourselves like men, my friends ; recall »e Your fiery valor now, for I perceive The son of Saturn doth award to me Victory and vast renown, and to the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Destruction. Fools! who built this slender wan Which we contemn, which cannot stand before =s The strength I bring; our steeds can overleap The trench they digged. When I shall reach their fleet, Remember the consuming power of fire, That I may give their vessels to the flames, And hew the Achaians down beside their prows, »*, While they are wrapped in the bewildering smoke." He spake; and then he cheered his coursers thus : — "Xanthus, Podargus, Lampus nobly bred, And /Ethon, now repay the generous care, The pleasant grain which my Andromache, 23s Daughter of great Eetion, largely gives. She mingles wine that ye may drink at will Ere yet she ministers to me, who boast To be her youthful husband. Let us now Pursue with fiery haste, that we may seize m» The shield of Nestor, the great fame of which Has reached to heaven, — an orb of massive gold Even to the handles. Let us from the limbs Of Diomed, the tamer of fleet steeds, Strip off the glorious mail that Vulcan forged: v. This done, our hope may be that all the Greeks Will climb their galleys and depart to-night." So boasted he; but queenly Juno's ire Was kindled, and she shuddered on her throne Till great Olympus trembled. Thus she spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Neptune, mighty ruler of the deep . — "Earth-shaker! thou who rulest far and wide! Is there no pity for the perishing Greeks Within that breast of thine? They bring to thee At Helice and ^Egse costly gifts »ss And many, wherefore thy desire should be That they may win the victory. If the gods Who favor the Achaians should combine To drive the Trojans back, and hold in check High-thundering Jupiter, the God would sit In sullen grief on Ida's top alone." Earth-shaking Neptune answered in disdain :— "O Juno, rash in speech! what words are these? Think not that I can wish to join the gods In conflict with the monarch Jupiter, ass The son of Saturn, mightier than we all." So held they colloquy. Meanwhile the space Betwixt the galleys and the trench and wall Was crowded close with steeds and shielded men; For Hector, son of Priam, terrible «7» As Mars the lightning-footed, drave them on Before him. Jove decreed him such renown. And now would he have given that noble fleet To the consuming flame, if Juno, queen Of heaven, had not beheld, and moved the heart »7s Of Agamemnon to exhort the Greeks That they should turn and combat. With quick steps He passed beside the fleet, among the tents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing in his strong hand his purple robe, And climbed the huge black galley which had brought ,*, Ulysses to the war, — for in the midst It lay, and thence the king might send his voice To either side, as far as to the tents Of Ajax and Achilles, who had moored Their galleys at the different extremes »ss Of the long camp, confiding in their might Of arm and their own valor. Thence he called, With loud, clear utterance, to the Achaian host: — "O Greeks! shame on ye! cravens who excel In form alone! Where now are all the boasts »» Of your invincible valor, — the vain words Ye uttered pompously when at the feast In Lemnos sitting ye devoured the flesh Of horned beeves, and drank from bowls of wine, Flower-crowned, and bragged that each of you would be A match for fivescore Trojans, or for twice Fivescore? And now we all are not a match For Hector singly, who will give our fleet Soon to consuming flames. O Father Jove, Was ever mighty monarch visited y* By thee with such affliction, or so robbed Of high renown! And yet in my good ship, Bound to this luckless coast, I never passed By thy fair altars that I did not burn The fat and thighs of oxen, with a prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I might sack the well-defended Troy. Now be at least one wish of mine fulfilled, — That we may yet escape and get us hence; Nor let the Trojans thus destroy the Greeks." He spake, and wept. The All-Father, pitying him, Consented that his people should escape 3" The threatened ruin. Instantly he sent His eagle, bird of surest augury, Which, bearing in his talons a young fawn, The offspring of a nimble-footed roe, ws Dropped it at the fair altar where the Greeks Paid sacrifice to Panomphaean Jove. And they, when they beheld, and knew that Jove Had sent the bird, took courage, rallying, And rushed against the Trojans. Then no chief v Of all theGreeks— though many they—could boast That he before Tydides urged his steeds To sudden speed and drave them o'er the trench, And mingled in the combat. First of all He struck down Agelaus, Phradmon's son, 3»s Armed as he was, who turned his car to fly, And as he turned, Tydides with his spear Transfixed his back between the shoulder-blades, And drave the weapon through his breast. He fell To earth, his armor clashing with his fall. »0 Then Agamemnon followed, and with him His brother Menelaus; after these The chieftains Ajax, fearful in their strength; Idomeneus, and he who bore his arms,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meriones, like Mars in battle-field; as Eurypylus, Evaemon's glorious son; And ninthly Teucer came, who bent his bow Beneath the shield of Ajax Telamon, — For Ajax moved his shield from side to side, And thence the archer looked abroad, and aimed w, His arrows thence. Whoever in the throng Was struck fell lifeless. Teucer all the while, As hides a child behind his mother's robe, Sheltered himself by Ajax, whose great shield Concealed the chief from sight. What Trojan first Did faithful Teucer slay? Orsilochus, -»* Daetor, and Ophelestes, Ormenus, Chromius, and Lycophontes nobly born, And Hamopaon, Polyremon's son, And Mel.*iippus, — one by one the shafts 3s0 Of Teucer stretched them on their mother earth. Then Agamemnon, king of men, rejoiced As he beheld him, with his sturdy bow, Breaking the serried phalanxes of Troy; And came, and, standing near, bespake him thus :—- "Beloved Teucer! son of Telamon, 3* Prince of the people! ever be thy shafts Aimed thus, and thou shalt be the light and pride Of Greece, and of thy father Telamon, Who reared thee from a little child with care s, In his own halls, though spurious was thy birth. Go on to do him honor, though he now Be far away. And here I say to thee,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will keep my word, — if Jupiter The ^Egis-bearer and Minerva deign *s To let me level the strong walls of Troy, To thee will I assign the noblest prize After my own, — a tripod, or two steeds And chariot, or a wife to share thy bed." And thus the blameless Teucer made reply : — n« "Why, glorious son of Atreus, wouldst thou thus Admonish me, while yet I do my best, And pause not in the combat? From the time When we began to drive the enemy back To Ilium, I have smitten and have slain m Their warriors with my bow. Eight barbed shafts I sent, and each has pierced some warlike youth; But this fierce wolf-dog have I failed to strike." He spake, and sent another arrow forth At Hector with an eager aim. It missed Its mark, but struck Gorgythion down, the brave And blameless son of Priam; through his breast The arrow went. Fair Castianira brought The warrior forth, —a dame from /Esyma, Beautiful as a goddess. As within *s A garden droops a poppy to the ground, Bowed by its weight and by the rains of spring, So drooped his head within the heavy casque. And then did Teucer send another shaft At Hector, eager still to smite. It missed v Its aim again, for Phocbus turned aside The arrow, but it struck the charioteer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hector, Archeptolemus the brave, When rushing to the fight, and pierced his breast Close to the nipple; from the car he fell, 39s The swift steeds started back, and from his limbs The life and strength departed. A deep grief For his slain charioteer came darkly o'er The mind of Hector, yet, though sorrowing, He left him where he fell, and straightway called **, Cebriones, his brother, who was near, To mount and take the reins. Cebriones Heard and obeyed. Then from the shining car Leaped Hector with a mighty cry, and seized A ponderous stone, and, bent to crush him, ran «s At Teucer, who had from his quiver drawn One of his sharpest arrows, placing it Upon the bowstring. As he drew the bow, The strong-armed Hector hurled the jagged stone, And smote him near the shoulder, where the neck And breast are sundered by the collar bone, — 4n A fatal spot. The bowstring brake ; the arm Fell nerveless ; on his knees the archer sank, And dropped the bow. Then did not Ajax leave His fallen brother to the foe, but walked 41s Around him, sheltering him beneath his shield, Till two dear friends of his — Menestheus, son Of Echius, and Alastor nobly born — Approached, and took him up and carried him, Heavily groaning, to the hollow ships. Then did Olympian Jove again inspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojan host with valor, and they drave The Achaians backward to the yawning trench. Then Hector came, with fury in his eyes, Among the foremost warriors. As a hound, es Sure of his own swift feet, attacks behind The lion or wild boar, and tears his flank, Yet warily observes him as he turns, So Hector followed close the long-haired Greeks, And ever slew the hindmost as they fled. o0 Yet now, when they in flight had crossed again The trench and palisades, and many a one Had died by Trojan hands, they made a halt Before their ships, and bade each other stand, And lifted up their hands and prayed aloud as To all the gods; while Hector, urging on His long-maned steeds, and with stern eyes that seemed The eyes of Gorgon or of murderous Mars, Hither and thither swept across the field. The white-armed Juno saw, and, sorrowing, «= Addressed Minerva with these winged words : — "Ah me! thou daughter of the God who bears The aegis, shall we not descend to aid The perishing Greeks m their extremity? A cruel doom is theirs, to fall, destroyed «s By one man's rage, — the terrible assault Of Hector, son of Priam, who has made Insufferable havoc in the field." And thus in turrt the blue-eyed Pallas spake:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"That warrior long eie this had lost his life, 4s0 Slain by the Greeks on his paternal soil, But that my father's mind is warped by wrath. Unjust to me and harsh, he thwarts my aims, Forgetting all I did for Hercules, His son, — how often, when Eurystheus set va A task too hard for him, I saved his life. To heaven he raised his eyes and wept, and Jove Despatched me instantly to succor him. And yet if I, in my forecasting mind, Had known all this when he was bid to bring From strong-walled Erebus the dog of hell, He had not safely crossed the gulf of Styx. But now Jove hates me; now he grants the wish Of Thetis, who hath kissed his knees and touched His beard caressingly, and prayed that he Would crown the overthrower of walled towns, Achilles, with great honor. Well, the time Will come when he shall call me yet again His dear Minerva. Hasten now to yoke For us thy firm-paced steeds, while in the halls 470 Of aegis-bearing Jupiter I brace My armor on for war, — and I shall see If Hector of the beamy helm, the son Of Priam, will rejoice when we appear Upon the field again. Assuredly «s The men of Troy shall die, to feast the birds Of prey and dogs beside the Grecian fleet." She ended, and the white-armed deity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juno obeyed her. Juno the august, The mighty Saturn's daughter, hastily «, Caparisoned the golden-bitted steeds. Meanwhile, Minerva on the palace-floor Of Jupiter let drop the gorgeous robe Or many hues, which her own hands had wrought, And, putting on the Cloud-compeller's mail, «ss Stood armed for cruel war. And then she climbed The glorious car, and took in hand the spear — Huge, heavy, strong —- with which she overthrows The serried phalanxes of valiant men Whene'er this daughter of the Almighty One «s» Is angered. Juno bore the lash, and urged The coursers to their speed. The gates of heaven Opened before them of their own accord, — Gates guarded by the Hours, on whom the care Of the great heaven and of Olympus rests, m To open or to close the wall of cloud. Through these they guided their impatient steeds. From Ida Jupiter beheld, in wrath, And summoned Iris of the golden wings, And bade her do this errand : " Speed thee hence, s00 Fleet Iris! turn them back; allow them not Thus to defy me : it is not for them To engage with me in war. I give my word, — Nor shall it lack fulfilment, — I will make The swift steeds lame that draw their car, and hurl The riders down, and dash the car itself s« To fragments. Ten long years shall wear away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before they cease to suffer from the wounds Made by the thunderbolt. Minerva thus May learn the fate of those who strive with Jove s» With Juno I am less displeased, for she Is ever bent to thwart my purposes." He spake; and Iris, with the tempest's speed Departing, bore the message from the heights Of Ida to the great Olympus, where, s1s Among the foremost passes of the mount, All seamed with hollow vales, she met and stayed The pair, delivering thus the word of Jove :— "Now whither haste ye? What strange madness fires Your breasts? The son of Saturn surfers not s*, That ye befriend the Greeks. He threatens thus, — And will fulfil his threat, — that he will make The coursers lame that draw your car, and hurl The riders down, and dash the car itself To fragments, and that ten long years must pass s»s Ere ye shall cease to suffer from the wounds Made by the thunderbolt. So shalt thou leam, O Pallas! what it is to strive with Jove. With Juno is he less displeased, for she Is ever bent to thwart his purposes; s3° But thou, he says, art guilty above all, And shameless as a hound, if thou dare lift Thy massive spear against thy father Jove." So spake fleet-footed Iris, and withdrew; And thus again to Pallas Juno said:— as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Child of the AEgis-bearer! let us strive With Jove no longer for the sake of men, But let one perish and another live, As chance may rule the hour, and let the God, Communing with his secret mind, mete out s40 To Greeks and Trojans their just destiny." She spake, and turned the firm-paced coursers back, The coursers with fair-flowing manes. The Hours Unyoked them, bound them to the ambrosial stalls, And leaned against the shining walls the car; 34s While Juno and Minerva went among The other deities and took their place Upon their golden seats, though sad at heart. Then with his steeds, and in his bright-wheeled car, Came Jove from Ida to the dwelling-place Of gods upon Olympus. There did he Who shakes the islands loose the steeds and bring The chariot to its place, and o'er it spread Its covering of lawn. The Thunderer Seated himself upon his golden throne, sss The great Olympus trembling as he stepped; While Juno and Minerva sat apart Together, nor saluted him, nor asked Of aught; but he perceived their thoughts and said : — "Juno and Pallas! why so sad? Not long s*, Ye toiled in glorious battle to destroy The Trojans, whom ye hold in bitter hate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This strength of mine, and this invincible arm Not all the gods upon the Olympian mount Can turn to flight, while your fair limbs were seized With trembling ere ye entered on the shock sm And havoc of the war. Now let me say — And well the event would have fulfilled my words — That, smitten with the thunder from my hand, Your chariots never would have brought you back 370 To this Olympus and the abode of gods." He spake ; while Pallas and the queen of heaven Repined with close-pressed lips, and in their hearts Devised new mischiefs for the Trojan race. Silent Minerva sat, nor dared express as The anger that she bore her father Jove; But Juno could not curb her wrath, and spake :— "What words, austere Saturnius, hast thou said? Thou art, we know, invincible in might; Yet must we sorrow for the heroic Greeks, 380 Who, by a cruel fate, are perishing. We stand aloof from war, if thou require; Yet would we counsel the Achaian host, Lest by thy wrath they perish utterly." And then the Cloud-compeller, answering, said : — "O Juno, large-eyed and august, if thou s«. Look forth to-morrow, thou shalt then behold The all-powerful son of Saturn laying waste With greater havoc still the mighty host Of warlike Greeks. For Hector, great in war, s» Shall pause not from the conflict, till he rouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The swift-paced son of Peleus at the ships, When, pent in narrow space, the armies fight For slain Patroclus: such the will of fate. As for thyself, I little heed thy rage: 593 Not even shouldst thou wander to the realm Where earth and ocean end, where Saturn sits Beside Iapetus, and neither light Of overgoing suns nor breath of wind Refreshes them, but gulfs of Tartarus «90 Surround them, — shouldst thou even thither bend Thy way, I shall not heed thy rage, who art Beyond all others shamelessly perverse." He ceased ; but white-armed Juno answered not. And now into the sea the sun's bright light «0s Went down, and o'er the foodful earth was drawn Night's shadow. Most unwillingly the sons Of Troy beheld the sunset. To the Greeks Eagerly wished the welcome darkness came. Then from the fleet illustrious Hector led «» The Trojans, and beside the eddying stream, In a clear space uncumbered by the slain, Held council. There, alighting from their cars, They listened to the words that Hector spake, — Hector, beloved of Jove. He held a spear, «is In length eleven cubits, with a blade Of glittering brass, bound with a ring of gold. On this he leaned, and spake these winged words: — "Hear me, ye Trojans, Dardans, and allies. But now I thought that, having first destroyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Achaian host and fleet, we should return This night to wind-swept Ilium. To their aid The darkness comes, and saves the Greeks, and saves Their galleys ranged along the ocean-side. Obey we, then, the dark-browed night; prepare ,*.$ Our meal; unyoke the steeds with flowing manes, And set their food before them. Bring at once Oxen and fatlings of the flock from town, And from your dwellings bread and pleasant wine. And let us gather store of wood, to feed A multitude of blazing fires all night, Till Morning, daughter of the Dawn, appear, — Fires that shall light the sky, lest in the hours Of darkness with their ships the long-haired Greeks Attempt escape across the mighty deep. «^ And, that they may not climb their decks unharmed. Let every foeman bear a wound to cure At home, — an arrow-wound or gash of spear,. Given as he leaps on board. So other foes Shall dread a conflict with the knights of Troy. «*• And let the heralds, dear to Jove, command That all grown youths and hoary-headed men Keep watch about the city in the towers Built by the gods ; and let the feebler sex Kindle large fires upon their hearths at home; ,*s And let the guard be strengthened, lest the foe Should steal into the city while its sons Are all abroad. Thus let it be till morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brave Trojans! I but speak of what the time Requires, and on the morrow I shall speak 630 Of what the Trojan knights have then to do. My prayer to Jove and to the other gods, And my hope is, that I may drive away These curs, brought hither by an evil fate In their black ships. All night will we keep watch, And, arming, with the early morn renew «s' The desperate conflict at the hollow ships. Then shall I see if valiant Diomed Tydides has the power to make me leave The Grecian galleys for the city-walls, «, Or whether I shall slay him with my spear And take his bloody spoils. To-morrow's sun Will make his valor known, if he withstand The assault of this my weapon. Yet I think The sunrise will behold him slain among The first, with many comrades lying round. Would that I knew myself as certainly Secure from death and the decays of age, And to be held in honor like the gods Apollo and Minerva, as I know ,*, This day will bring misfortune to the Greeks!" So Hector spake, and all the Trojan host Applauded; from the yoke forthwith they looped The sweaty steeds, and bound them to the cars With halters; to the town they sent in haste «71 For oxen and the fatlings of the flock, And to their homes for bread and pleasant wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gathered fuel in large store. The winds Bore up the fragrant fumes from earth to heaven. So, high in hope, they sat the whole night through In warlike lines, and many watch-fires blazed. osi As when in heaven the stars look brightly forth Round the clear-shining moon, while not a breeze Stirs in the depths of air, and all the stars Are seen, and gladness fills the shepherd's heart, «ss So many fires in sight of Ilium blazed, Lit by the sons of Troy, between the ships And eddying Xanthus : on the plain there shone A thousand ; fifty warriors by each fire Sat in its light. Their steeds beside the cars — Champing their oats and their white barley — stood, And waited for the golden morn to rise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
