<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 11</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle"></span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-11" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<p>
				<span>NOW did the Morning from her couch beside Renowned Tithonus rise, that she might bring The light to gods and men, when Jupiter To the swift galleys of the Grecian host Sent baleful Strife, who bore in hand aloft 5 War's ensigns. On the huge black ship that brought Ulysses, in the centre of the fleet, She stood, where she might shout to either side, — To Telamonian Ajax in his tents And to Achilles, who had ranged their ships «o At each extreme of the Achaian camp, Relying on their valor and strong arms. Loud was the voice, and terrible, in which She shouted from her station to the Greeks, And into every heart it carried strength is And the resolve to combat manfully And never yield. The battle now to them Seemed more to be desired than the return To their dear country in their roomy ships. Atrides called aloud, exhorting them »o To gird themselves for battle. Then he clad Himself in glittering brass. First to his thighs He bound the beautiful greaves with silver clasps, Then fitted to his chest the breastplate given By Cinyras, a pledge of kind intent;— »s For, when he heard in Cyprus that the Greeks

Page 277
Book XI. 277 Were bound for Ilium in their ships, he sent This gift, a homage to the king of men ; — Ten were its bars of tawny bronze, and twelve Were gold, and twenty tin ; and on each side 30 Were three bronze serpents stretching toward the neck, Curved like the colored bow which Saturn's son Sets in the clouds, a sign to men. He hung His sword, all glittering with its golden studs, About his shoulders. In a silver sheath » It nestled, which was .slung on golden rings. And then he took his shield, a mighty orb, And nobly wrought and strong and beautiful, Bound with ten brazen circles. On its disk Were twenty bosses of white tin, and one « Of tawny bronze just in the midst, where glared A Gorgon's-head with angry eyes, round which Were sculptured Fear and Flight. Along its band Of silver twined a serpent wrought in bronze, With three heads springing from one neck and formed « Into an orb. Upon his head he placed A helmet rough with studs on every side, And with four bosses, and a horse-hair plume That nodded fearfully on high. He took In hand two massive spears, brass-tipped and sharp, That shone afar and sent their light to heaven, s1 Where Juno and Minerva made a sound Like thunder in mid-sky, as honoring

Page 278
278 The Iliad. The sovereign of Mycenae rich in gold. Each chief gave orders to his charioteer ss To stay his horses firmly by the trench, While they rushed forth in arms. At once arose, Ere yet the sun was up, a mighty din. They marshalled by the trench the men on foot; The horse came after, with short space between. ,so The son of Saturn sent among their ranks Confusion, and dropped down upon the host Dews tinged with blood, in sign that he that day Would send to Hades many a_ valiant chief. The Trojans, on their side, in the mid-plain »s Drew up their squadrons on a hill, around The mighty Hector, and Polydamas The blameless, and ^Eneas, who among The sons of Troy was honored like a god, And three sons of Antenor, who were named 70 Agenor and the noble Polybus And the young Acamas of godlike bloom, There Hector in the van uplifted bore His broad round shield. As some portentous star Breaks from the clouds and shines, and then again Enters their shadow, Hector thus appeared -s Among the foremost, issuing his commands, Then sought the hindmost. All in brass, he shone Like lightnings of the ^Egis-bearer, Jove. As when two lines of reapers, face to face, » In some rich landlord's field of barley or wheat Move on, and fast the severed handfuls fall,

Page 279
Book XL So, springing on each other, they of Troy And they of Argos smote each other down, And neither thought of ignominious flight. They met each other man to man; they rushed Like wolves to combat. Cruel Strife looked on Rejoicing; she alone of all the gods Was present in the battle; all the rest, Par off, sat quiet in their palaces, The glorious mansions built for them along The summits of Olympus. Yet they all Blamed Saturn's son that he should honor thus The Trojans. The All-Father heeded not Their murmurings, but, seated by himself Apart, exulting in his sovereignty, Looked on the city of Troy, the ships of Greece, The gleam of arms, the slayers, and the slain. While yet't was morn, and still the holy light Of day was brightening, fast the weapons smote On either side, and fast the people fell; But at the hour when on the mountain-slope The wood cutter makes ready his repast, Weary with felling lofty trees, and glad To rest, and eager for the grateful meal. The Greeks, encouraging each other, charged And broke the serried phalanxes of Troy. Firs' Agamemnon, springing forward, slew The shepherd of his people and their chief, Bienor, and his trusty comrade next, — The charioteer Oileus, who had leaped

Page 280
28o The Iliad. Down from his chariot to confront the king. Him Agamemnon with his trenchant spear Smote in the forehead as he came. The helm Of massive brass was vain to stay the blow: m The weapon pierced it and the bone, and stained The brain with blood ; it felled him rushing on. The monarch stripped the slain, and, leaving them With their white bosoms bare, went on to slay Isus and Antiphus, King Priam's sons, — ,*, One born in wedlock, one of baser birth, — Both in one chariot. Isus held the reins While Antiphus, the high-born brother, fought. These had Achilles once on Ida's height Made prisoners, as they fed their flocks ; he bound Their limbs with osier bands, but gave them up m For ransom to the Trojans. Now the king Of men, Atrides Agamemnon, pierced Isus above the nipple with his spear, And with his falchion smiting Antiphus '30 Beside the ear, he hurled him from his car. Then hastening up, and stripping from the dead Their shining mail, he knew them ; he had seen Both at the ships to which the fleet of foot, Achilles, brought them bound from Ida's side. ,3s As when a lion comes upon the haunt Of a swift hind, to make an easy prey Of her young fawns, and, with his powerful teeth Seizing them, takes their tender lives; while she, Though nigh, can bring no aid but yields herself ,*,

Page 281
Book XI. 281 To mortal fear, and, to escape his rage, Flies swiftly through the wood of close-grown oaks, With sweaty sides, — thus none of all the host Of Trojans could avert from Priam's sons Their fate, but fled in terror from the Greeks. us Next on Pisander and Hippolochus Atrides rushed, — brave warriors both, and sons Of brave Antimachus, the chief who took Gold and rich gifts from Paris, and refused To let the Trojans render Helen back To fair-haired Mcnelaus. His two sons, Both in one car, and reining their fleet steeds, Atrides intercepted; they let fall The embroidered reins, dismayed, as, lion-like, Forward he came; and, cowering, thus they prayed : — 1ss "Take us alive, Atrides, and accept A worthy ransom, for Antimachus Keeps in his halls large treasures, — brass and gold. And well-wrought steel; and he will send, from these, Large ransom, hearing we are at the fleet '*, Alive." So prayed they with bland words, and met Harsh answer : " Since ye call Antimachus Your father, who in Trojan council once Proposed that Menelaus, whom we sent A legate with Ulysses the divine, «s Should not return to Greece, but suffer death, Your blood must answer for your father's guilt." So spake the king, and, striking with his spear

Page 282
282 The Iliad. I'isander's breast, he dashed him from the car. Prone on the ground he lay. Hippolochus 170 Leaped down and met the sword. Atrides lopped His hands and drave the weapon through his neck, And sent the head to roll among the crowd. And then he left the dead, and rushed to where The ranks were in disorder; with him went 17s Hiswell-armed Greeks; there they who fought on foot Slaughtered the flying foot; the horsemen there Clove horsemen down : the coursers' trampling feet Raised the thick dust to shadow all the plain; While Agamemnon cheered the Achaians on, ,&, And chased and slew the foe. As when a fire Seizes a thick-grown forest, and the wind Drives it along in eddies, while the trunks Fall with the boughs amid devouring flames, So fell the flying Trojans by the hand . *$ Of Agamemnon. Many high-maned steeds Dragged noisily their empty cars among The ranks of battle, never more to bear Their charioteers, who lay upon the earth The vulture's feast, a sorrow to their wives. 190 But Jove beyond the encountering arms, the dust, The carnage, and the bloodshed and the din Bore Hector, while Atrides in pursuit Was loudly cheering the Achaians on. Meantime the Trojans fled across the plain ,qs Toward the wild fig-tree growing near the tomb

Page 283
Book XI. 283 Of ancient Ilus, son of Dardanus, — Eager to reach the town ; and still the son Of Atreus followed, shouting, and with hands Blood-stained and dust-begrimed. And when they reached The Seaman portals and the beechen tree, They halted, waiting for the rear, like beeves Chased panting by a lion who has come At midnight on them, and has put the herd To flight, and one of them to certain death, — ~s Whose neck he breaks with his strong teeth and then Devours the entrails, lapping up the blood. Thus did Atrides Agamemnon chase The Trojans; still he slew the hindmost; still They fled before him. Many by his hand »10 Fell from their chariots prone, for terrible Beyond all others with the spear was he. But when he now was near the city-wall, The Father of immortals and of men Came down from the high heaven, and took his seat On many-fountained Ida. In his grasp ,•«, He held a thunderbolt, and this command He gave to Iris of the golden wings: — "Haste, Iris fleet of wing, and bear my words To Hector : — While he sees the king of men, m Atrides, in the van and dealing death Among the ranks of warriors, let him still Give way, encouraging his men to hold Unflinching battle with the enemy.

Page 284
284 The Iliad. But when Atrides, wounded by a spear »»s Or arrow, shall ascend his chariot, then Will I nerve Hector's arm with strength to slay Until he come to the good ships of Greece, And the sun set, and hallowed night come down." He spake; and she, whose feet are like the wind In swiftness, heeded the command, and flew «3i From Ida's summit to the sacred town Of Troy, and found the noble Hector, son Of warlike Priam, standing mid the steeds And the strong chariots, and, approaching, said :— "O Hector, son of Priam, and like Jove rrs In council! Jove the All-Father bids me say, As long as thou shalt see the king of men, Atrides, in the van, and dealing death Among the ranks of warriors, thou shalt still wo Give way, encouraging thy men to hold Unflinching battle with the enemy; But when Atrides, wounded by a spear Or arrow, shall ascend his chariot, then Will Jove endue thy arm with strength to slay us Until thou come to the good ships of Greece, And the sun set, and hallowed night come down." So the fleet Iris spake, and went her way; While Hector, leaping from his car in arms, And wielding his sharp spears, went everywhere »s0 Among the Trojan ranks, exhorting them To combat, and renewed the stubborn fight. They rallied and stood firm against the Greeks.

Page 285
Book XL 285 The Greeks, in turn, made strong their phalanxes. The battle raged again, as front to front ass They stood, while Agamemnon eagerly- Pressed forward, proud tc lead the van in fight. Say, Muses, dwellers of Olympus! who First of the Trojans or their brave allies Encountered Atreus' son? Iphidamas, **, Son of Antenor, strong and daring, bred On the rich soil of Thrace, the nurse of flocks. His grandsire Cisseus, from whose loins the fair Theano sprang, had reared him from a child Within his palace; and, when he attained *>s Youth's glorious prime, still kept him, giving him His child to wife. He wedded her, but left At once the bridal chamber when he heard Of the Greek war on Ilium, and set sail With twelve beaked galleys. These he afterward »70 Left at Percope, — marching on to Troy. And he it was who came to meet the son Of Atreus. As the heroes now drew near Each other, Agamemnon missed his aim; His thrust was parried. Then Iphidamas »7s Dealt him beneath the breastplate on the belt A vigorous blow, and urged the spear with all His strength of arm ; yet through the plated belt It could not pierce, for there it met a plate Of silver, and its point was turned like lead. * With lion strength, Atrides seized and drew The weapon toward him< plucked it from the hand

Page 286
286 The Iliad. That held it, and let fall his falchion's edge Upon the Trojan's neck and laid him dead. Unhappy youth! he slept an iron sleep, — ^ Slain fighting for his country, far away From the young virgin bride yet scarcely his, For whom large marriage-gifts he made, — of beeves A hundred, — and had promised from the flocks That thronged his fields a thousand sheep and goats. Atrides Agamemnon spoiled the slain, *>i And bore his glorious armor off among The Argive host. Antenor's elder son, Illustrious Coon, saw, and bitter grief For his slain brother dimmed his eyes. He stood Aside, with his spear couched, while unaware The noble Agamemnon passed, and pierced The middle of the monarch's arm below The elbow; through the flesh the shining point Passed to the other side. The king of men, *■ Atrides, shuddered, yet refrained not then From combat ; but with his wind-seasoned spear He rushed on Ccon, who, to drag away His father's son Iphidamas, had seized The body by the feet, and called his friends, » The bravest, to his aid. Atrides thrust His brazen spear below the bossy shield, And slew him as he drew the corpse, and o'er The dead Iphidamas struck off his head. Thus were Antenor's sons — their doom fulfilled — Sent by Atrides to the realm of death. 3n

Page 287
Book XI. 287 And then he ranged among the enemy's ranks With wielded lance and sword and ponderous stones, While yet the warm blood issued from his wound. But when the wound grew dry, and ceased to flow v% With blood, keen anguish seized his vigorous fram As when a woman feels the piercing pangs Of travail brought her by the Ilythian maids, Daughters of Juno, who preside at births, And walk the ministers of bitter pains, — 3*, Such anguish seized on Agamemnon's frame; And, leaping to his chariot-seat, he bade The guider of the steeds make haste to reach The roomy ships, for he was overcome y» With pain ; but first he shouted to the Greeks : — "O friends, the chiefs and princes of the Greeks! Yours is the duty to drive back the war From our good ships, since all-disposing Jove Forbids me, for this day, to lead the fight." He spake. The charioteer applied the lash, 330 And not unwillingly the long-maned steeds Flew toward the hollow ships; upon their breasts Gathered the foam ; beneath their rapid feet Arose the dust, as from the battle's din They bore the wounded warrior. Hector saw «s The flight of Agamemnon, and aloud Called to the Trojans and the Lycians thus : — "Trojan and Lycian warriors, and ye sons Of Dardanus, who combat hand to hand, Be men; be mindful of your fame in war. 340

Page 288
288 The Iliad. Our mightiest foe withdraws; Saturnian Jove Crowns me with glory. Urge your firm-paced steeds On the brave Greeks, and win yet nobler fame." He spake. His words gave courage and new strength To every .heart. As when a hunter cheers us His white-toothed dogs against some lioness Or wild boar from the forest, Hector thus, The son of Priam, terrible as Mars The slayer of men, cheered on the gallant sons Of Troy against the Greeks. Himself, inspired 3s» With fiery valor, rushed among the foes In the mid-battle foremost, like a storm That swoops from heaven, and on the dark-blue sea Falls suddenly, and stirs it to its depths. Who then was slain the first, and who the last, 3ss By Hector, Priam's son, whom Jove designed To honor? First, Asaeus; Uolops, son Of Clytis ; and Autonoiis; and then Opites and Opheltius; next to whom ^ssymnus, Agelaus, Orus fell, j&, And resolute Hipponoiis the last. All these, the princes of the Greeks, he slew, Then smote the common crowd. As when a gale Blows from the west upon the mass of cloud Piled up before the south-wind's powerful breath, 343 And tears it with a mighty hurricane, While the swoln billows tumble, and their foam Is flung on high before the furious blast,

Page 289
Book XI. 289 So by the sword of Hector fell the heads Of the Greek soldiery; and there had been sro Ruin and ravage not to be repaired, And the defeated Greeks had flung themselves Into their ships, had not Ulysses then Exhorted thus Tydides Diomed :— "Tydides! what has quenched within our hearts Their fiery valor? Come, my friend, and take sv, Thy stand beside ma: foul disgrace were ours Should crested Hector make our fleet his prize." And thus the valiant Diomed replied :— "Most willingly I stand, and bear my part 3*, In battle; but with little hope, for Jove, The God of storms, awards the day to Troy.'' He spake, and pierced ThymbnEus with his spear Through the left breast, and dashed him from his car. Meanwhile Ulysses struck Molion down, 3»s The prince's stately comrade. These they left Never to fight again, and made their way Through the thick squadrons, carrying, as they went, Confusion with them. As two fearless boars Rush on the hounds, so, mingling in the war, i*, They bore the foe before them, and the Greeks Welcomed a respite from the havoc made By noble Hector. Next they seized a car Which bore two chiefs, the bravest of their host, — Sons of Percosian Merops, who was skilled 39s Beyond all men in portents. He enjoined His sons to keep aloof from murderous war. vol. 1. 13 a

Page 290
290 The Iliad. Yet did they not obey him, for the fate That doomed the twain to death impelled them on; And Diomed, the mighty with the spear, *» Spoiled them of life, and bore their armor off, A glittering prize. Meantime Ulysses slew Hippodamus, and next Hypirochus. The son of Saturn looked from Ida's height, And bade the battle rage on either side *,s With equal fury : both the encountering hosts Slew and were slain. Tydides with his spear Smote on the hip the chief Agastrophus, The son of Paeon, thoughtless wretch, whose steeds Were not at hand for flight; his charioteer 410 Held them at distance, while their master rushed Among the foremost warriors till he fell. Hector perceived his fall, as through the files He looked, and straightway hastened to the spot With shouts; and after him came rapidly 41s The phalanxes of Trojans. Diomed, The great in battle, shuddered as he saw, And thus addressed Ulysses, who was near : — "Lo! the destroyer, furious Hector, comes! Let us stand firm, and face and drive him back." 4•0 He said, and cast his brandished lance, nor missed The mark : it smote the helm on Hector's head. The brass glanced from the brass ; it could not pierce To the fair skin; the high and threefold helm — A gift from Phoebus — turned the point aside. «s The chief fell back, and, mingling with the throng,

Page 291
Book XI. 291 Dropped on one knee, and yet upheld himself With one broad palm upon the ground, while night Darkened his eyes. The son of Tydeus sprang To seize his spear, which now stood fixed in earth Among the foremost warriors. In that time «3, Did Hector breathe again, and, having leaped Into his chariot, he avoided death, By mingling with the crowd; while, spear in hand, Brave Diomed pursued him, shouting thus :— 43s "This time, thou cur, hast thou escaped thy doom, Though it was nigh thee. Phoebus rescues thee — The god to whom thou dost address thy prayers — Whene'er thou venturest mid the clash of spears. «0 Yet will I surely slay thee when we meet, If any god be on my side ; and now I go to strike where'er I find a foe." He spake, and struck the son of Pajon down, Skilful to wield the spear. But now the spouse Of fair-haired Helen — Alexander — stood w Leaning against a pillar by the tomb Of the Dardanian Ilus, who had been An elder of the people ; and he bent His bow against the monarch Diomed, Who at that moment knelt to strip the slain 4s0 Of the rich breastplate, and the shield that hung Upon his shoulders, and the massive ensque. The Trojan drew the bow's elastic horn, And sent an arrow that not vainly flew,

Page 292
292 The Iliad. But, striking the right foot, pierced through, and reached 4ss The ground beneath. Then Paris, with a laugh, Sprang from his ambush, shouting boastfully :— "Lo, thou art smitten! Not in vain my shaft Has flown; and would that it had pierced thy groin And slain thee! Then the Trojans had obtained «» Reprieve from slaughter, — they whodread thee now As bleating goats a lion." • Undismayed, The valiant Diomed made answer thus : — "Archer and railer! proud of thy smart bow, And ogler of the women! wouldst thou make «ss Trial of valor hand to hand with me, Thy bow should not avail thee, nor thy sheaf Of many arrows. Thou dost idly boast That thou hast hit my foot. I heed it not . It is as if a woman or a child «o Had struck me. Lightly falls the weapon-stroke Of an unwarlike weakling. T is not so With me, for when one feels my weapon's touch, It passes through him, and he dies; his wife Tears with her hands her cheeks; his little ones 17s Are orphans ; earth is crimsoned with his blood; And flocking round his carcass in decay, More numerous than women, are the birds." He spake. Ulysses, mighty with the spear, Came near and stood before him while he sat * Concealed, and drew the arrow from his foot. Keen was the agony that suddenly

Page 293
Book XL 293 Shot through his frame: he leaped into his car, And bade his charioteer make haste to reach The roomy ships: the pain had reached his heart . Ulysses, the great spearman, now was left «ss Alone, no Greek remaining by his side; For fear had seized them all. With inward grief The hero thus addressed his mighty soul : — "What will become of me? A great disgrace «0 Will overtake me if I flee in fear Before this multitude; and worse will be My fate if I am taken here alone, While Jove has driven away the other Greeks In terror. Why these questions, since I know 4-,s That cowards skulk from combat, while the brave, Wounded or wounding others, keeps his ground?" While thus he reasoned with himself, the ranks Of Trojans armed with bucklers came and closed Around their dreaded enemy. As when y» A troop of vigorous dogs and youths assail From every side a wild boar issuing forth From a deep thicket, whetting the white tusks Within his crooked jaws; they press around, And hear his gnashings, yet beware to come s»s Too nigh the terrible animal, — so rushed The Trojans round Ulysses, the beloved Of Jupiter. Then first the hero smote Deiopites on the shoulder-blade, And next struck Thoon down, and Ennomus, s" And in the navel pierced Chersidamas

Page 294
294 The Iliad. With his sharp spear, below the bossy shield, When leaping from his chariot. In the dust He fell, and grasped the earth with dying hands. Ulysses left them there, and with his spear s1s He wounded Charops, son of Hippasus, And brother of brave Socus. Socus saw, And hastened to his aid, and, standing near, The godlike chief bespake Ulysses thus :— "Renowned Ulysses! of whose arts and toils s*, There is no end, thou either shalt to-day Boast to have slain two sons of Hippasus, Brave as they are, and stripped them of their arms, Or, smitten by my javelin, lose thy life." He spake, and smote the Grecian's orbed shield. The swift spear, passing through the shining disk, s»« And fixed in the rich breastplate, tore the skin From all his side; yet Pallas suffered not The blade to reach the inner parts. At once The chief perceived that Socus had not given s10 A mortal wound, and, falling back a step, Thus spake: "Unhappy youth, thy doom will soon O'ertake thee. Though thou forcest me to pause From combat with the Trojans, I declare, This day thou sufferest the black doom of death. s3s Thou, smitten by my spear, shalt bring to me Increase of glory, and shalt yield thy soul To the grim horseman Pluto." Thus he spake, While Socus turned to flee; and as he turned, Ulysses with the spear transfixed his back, w0

Page 295
Book XI. 295 And drave the weapon through his breast: he fell, With armor clashing, to the earth, while thus The great Ulysses gloried over him : — "O Socus! son of warlike Hippasus The horseman! death has overtaken thee, s»s And thou couldst not escape. Unhappy one! Now thou art dead thy father will not come To close thy eyes, nor she, the honored one Who gave thee birth; but birds of prey shall flap Their heavy wings above thee, and shall tear 3s» Thy flesh, while I in dying shall receive Due funeral honors from the noble Greeks." He spake, and from his wounded side drew forth, And from his bossy shield, the ponderous spear Which warlike Socus threw. A gush of blood sss Followed, and torturing pain. Now, when they saw Ulysses bleed, the gallant sons of Troy Called to each other, rushing in a crowd To where he stood. Retreating as they came, He shouted to his comrades. Thrice he raised s*, His voice as loud as human lungs could shout; Thrice warlike Menelaus heard the cry, And spake at once to Ajax at his side : — "Most noble Ajax, son of Telamon, Prince of thy people! to my ear is brought s»s The cry of that unconquerable man, Ulysses, seemingly as if the foe Had hemmed him round alone, and pressed him sore In combat. Break we through the crowd, and bring

Page 296
296 The Iliad. Succor, lest harm befall him, though so brave, — 3-0 Fighting among the Trojans thus alone, — And lest the Greeks should lose their mighty chief." He spake, and led the way; his godlike friend Followed. They found Ulysses, dear to Jove, — The Trojans thronging round him like a troop s7s Of ravening jackals round an antlered stag Which one who hunts upon the mountain-side Hath stricken with an arrow from his bow: By flight the stag escapes, while yet the blood Is warm and easily the limbs are moved; ss» But when at last the shaft hath quelled his strength, The hungry jackals in the forest shade Among the hills attack him, till by chance The dreaded lion comes; alarmed, they flee, And he devours the prey. So in that hour, s«3 Many and brave, the sons of Troy pursued Ulysses, skilled in war and wiles; while he Wielded the spear and warded off the day Of death. Then Ajax, coming near him, stood, With his tall buckler, like a tower of strength s90 Beside him, and the Trojans fled in fear On all sides. Warlike Menelaus took Ulysses by the hand, and led him forth From the thronged spot, while his attendant brought The chariot near him. Ajax sprang upon »s The Trojans, slaying Doryclus, a son Of Priam basely born. Then Pandorus He wounded ; next he struck Lysander down,

Page 297
Book XL 297 Pyrasus and Pylartes. As a stream, Swoln to a torrent by the showers of Jove. &» Sweeps down, from hill to plain, dry oaks and pines, And pours into the sea a muddy flood, So mighty Ajax routed and pursued The Trojans o'er the plain, and cut his way Through steeds and warriors. Hector knew not this. He fought where, on the battle's left, beside c*« The Xanthus, fastest fell the slain, and round Great Nestor and the brave Idomeneus Arose a mighty tumult. In that throng Did Hector mingle with his spear and steeds, «10 Performing feats of valor, and laid waste The ranks of youthful warriors. Yet the Greeks Would not have yielded ground, if Paris, spouse Of fair-haired Helen, had not forced the chief Machaon, fighting gallantly, to pause; «,s For with an arrow triple-barbed he pierced The chiefs right shoulder, and the valiant Greeks Feared lest the battle turn and he be slain. And thus Idomeneus to Nestor said: — "Neleian Nestor, glory of the Greeks, Haste, mount thy chariot; let Machaon take A place beside thee ; urge thy firm-paced steeds Rapidly toward the fleet; a leech like him, Who cuts the arrow from the wound and soothes The pain with balms, is worth a host to us." «s He spake; and the Gerenian knight obeyed, And climbed the car in haste. Machaon, son I3»

Page 298
298 The Iliad. Of /F.sculapius the peerless leech, Mounted beside him; Nestor lashed the steeds, And toward the roomy ships, which well they knew, And longed to reach, they flew with eager speed. Meantime Cebriones, who had his seat *m By Hector in the chariot, saw the ranks Of Troy disordered, and addressed the chief: — "While we, O Hector, here are mid the Greeks Just in the skirts of the tumultuous fray, «* The other Trojans, men and steeds, are thrown Into confusion where the warriors throng, For Telamonian Ajax puts their ranks To rout; I know him well by that broad shield »« Borne on his shoulders. Thither let us drive Our steeds and chariot, where in desperate strife Meet horse and foot and hew each other down, And a perpetual clamor fills the air." «u He spake ; and with the whistling lash he struck The long-maned steeds, and, as they felt the stroke, Forward they flew with the swift car among The Greeks and Trojans, trampling in their way Corpses and shields. The axle underneath «« Was steeped in blood ; the rim of the chariot-seat Was foul with the red drops which from their hoofs The coursers sprinkled and the wheels threw up. Then Hector strove, by rushing on the crowd, To pierce it and break through it. To the Greeks His coming brought destruction and dismay; «ss And well his spear was wielded. Through the ranks

Page 299
Book XI. 299 Of other warriors with the spear he ranged, With sword and ponderous stones; yet warily He shunned the fight with Ajax Tel.imon. Then Father Jove Almighty touched with fear «*, The heart of Ajax. All amazed he stood, And cast his sevenfold buckler of bull's-hide Upon his back, and, terrified, withdrew. Now casting glances like a beast of prey From side to side, he turned to right and left, «3 And, slowly yielding, moved knee after knee. As when the rustics with their hounds drive off A hungry lion from their stalls of kine, Whom, watching all the night, they suffer not To make their herd a prey ; but he, intent «70 On ravin, rushes forward, yet in vain; For many a javelin flies from daring hands Against him, many a blazing torch is swung, At which, though fierce, he trembles, and at morn Stalks off in sullen mood ;— so Ajax, sad «7s At heart, and fearing for the Grecian fleet, Unwillingly fell back before the foe. And as, when entering in a field, an ass Slow-paced, whose flanks have broken many a shaft To splinters, crops the harvest as it grows, «--0 And boys attack him with their rods, — though small Their strength, — but scarce, till he has browsed his fill, Can drive him forth, — so did the gallant sons Of Troy, and their allies from distant lands,

Page 300
300 The Iliad. Continually pursue the mighty son «s Of Telamon, and hurl their spears against The centre of his shield. And now he wheeled, As conscious of great valor, and repulsed The crowding phalanxes; and now again He turned to flee. And thus he kept the foe ,&, From reaching the swift galleys, while he stood Between the Greeks and Trojans, terrible In wrath. The javelins hurled by daring hands Against him—some hung fixed in his broad shield; And many, ere they came to his fair skin, «93 Fell midway, — eager though they were to pierce The warrior's side, — and plunged into the earth. Eurypylus, Evaemon's noble son, Saw Ajax sorely pressed with many darts, And came and stood beside him, taking aim -,», With his bright spear, and in the liver smote, Beneath the midriff, Apisaon, son Of Phausias, and a prince among his tribe. His knees gave way, and down he sank in death. But godlike Alexander, who beheld 70s The slayer stripping Apisaon's corpse Of armor, at that moment bent his bow, And pierced Eurypylus in the right thigh. The reed brake in the wound. He writhed with pain, And mingled with his fellows in the ranks, 710 Avoiding death, yet shouting to the Greeks :— "O friends, the chiefs and leaders of the Greeks, Rally and keep your ground; ward off the fate

Page 301
Book XI. 301 Of death from Ajax, who is sorely pressed With darts, and, much I fear, may not escape 71s Safe from this stormy conflict. S'and ye firm Around the mighty son of Telamon." So spake the wounded warrior; while his friends Rallied around him, with their shields inclined Against their shoulders, ?.nd with lifted spears. 7»0 And Ajax came and joined them; then he turned, And firmly faced the foe. The Greeks renewed The combat with a rage like that of fire. Now meantime the Neleian coursers, steeped In sweat, were bearing Nestor and the prince 7»s Machaon from the battle. On the prow Of his great ship, Achilles, swift of foot, Looked forth, and, gazing on the hard-fought fray And the sad A;ut, beheld them. Then he called His friend Patroclus, shouting from the ship. 730 Patroclus heard, within the tent, and came, Glorious as Mars ; — yet with that day began His woes. The gallant Menoetiades Made answer thus: "Why callest thou my name, Achilles, and what needest thou of me?" ns And thus rejoined Achilles, swift of foot: — "Son of Menoetius, nobly born, and well Beloved by me, the Greeks, I deem, will soon Be at my knees, imploring aid ; for now A hard necessity besets their host. 7« But go, Patroclus, dear to Jove, and ask Of Nestor who it is that he hath brought

Page 302
302 The Iliad. Thus wounded from the field. Seen from behind, His form was like Machaon, — wholly like That son of /Esculapius; but the face 743 I saw not, as the rapid steeds flew by." He spake. Patroclus hearkened to his friend, And hastened to the Grecian tents and ships. Now when they reached the tent of Neleus' son, The warriors in the chariot set their feet 730 Upon the nourishing earth. Eurymedon, The old man's charioteer, took from the mares Their harness; while the chieftainscooled themselves, And dried their sweaty garments in the breeze, Facing the border of the sea, and then, 7ss Entering the tent of Nestor, sat them down On couches. Hecamede, bright of hair, Prepared for them a mingled draught; the maid, A daughter of the great Arsinoiis, came From Tenedos with Nestor, when the town 7&, Was ravaged by Achilles, and the Greeks Gave her to Nestor, chosen from the rest For him, as wisest of their counsellors. First she drew forth a table fairly wrought, Of polished surface, and with steel-blue feet, *s And on it placed a brazen tray which bore A thirst-provoking onion, honeycomb, And sacred meal of wheat. Near these she set A noble beaker which the ancient chief Had brought from home, embossed with studs of gOld. 770

Page 303
Book XI. 303 Four were its handles, and each handle showed Two golden turtles feeding, while below Two others formed the base. Another hand Could scarce have raised that beaker from its place, But Nestor lifted it with ease. The maid, 77s Fair as a goddess, mingled Pramnian wine, And grated o'er it, with a rasp of brass, A goat's-milk cheese, and, sprinkling the white flour Upon it, bade them drink. With this they quenched Their parching thirst, and then amused the time t*, With pleasant talk. Patroclus to the door Meantime, a godlike presence, came, and stood. The old man, as he saw him, instantly Rose from his princely seat and seized his hand, And led him in and bade him sit; but he 7«s Refused the proffered courtesy, and said: — "Nay, 't is no time to sit : persuade me not, Nursling of Jove ; for he is to be feared, And prone to wrath, who sent me to inquire What wounded man is with thee ; but I know, — 790 Now that I see Machaon sitting here, The shepherd of the people. I must haste Back to Achilles, bearing my report. Thou knowest, ancient chief, how quick he is To take offence and blame the innocent." m Then Nestor, the Gerenian knight, rejoined :— "Why does Achilles pity thus the sons Of Greece when wounded? Little can he know What sorrow reigns throughout the Grecian host

Page 304
3°4 The Iliad. While, smitten in the close or distant fight, &» Our bravest lie disabled in their ships. The valiant son of Tydeus — Diomed — Is wounded — wounded Agamemnon lies, And the great wielder of the javelin, Ulysses. By an arrow in the thigh «05 Eurypylus is smitten, and I now Bring home this warrior with an arrow-wound. Yet doth Achilles, valiant as he is, Care nothing for the Greeks. Will he then wait Till our swift galleys, moored upon the shore, After a vain defence shall feed the flames Lit by the enemy's hand, and we be slain, And perish, heaps on heaps? My strength is now Not that which dwelt in these once active limbs. Would I were strong and vigorous as of yore, «,s When strife arose between our men and those Of Elis for our oxen driven away, And, driving off their beeves in turn, I slew The Elean chief, the brave Itymoneus, Son of Hypirochus! For, as he sought sM To save his herd, a javelin from my arm Smote him the first among his band. He fell; His rustic followers fled on every side; And mighty was the spoil we took: of beeves We drave off fifty herds, as many flocks &s Of sheep, of swine as many, and of goats An equal number, and of yellow steeds Thrice fifty ; — these were mares, and by their siues

Page 305
Book XL 305 Ran many a colt. We drave them all within Neleian Pylos in the night. Well pleased t& Was Neleus, that so large a booty fell To me, who entered on the war so young. When morning brake, the heralds' cry was heard Summoning all the citizens to meet To whom from fruitful El is debts were due; is And then the princes of the Pyleans came, And made division of the spoil. For much The Epeians owed us: we were yet but few In Pylos, and had suffered grievously. The mighty Hercules in former years ««0 Had made us feel his wrath, and of our men Had slain the bravest : of the twelve who drew Their birth from Neleus, I alone am left; The others fell. The Epeians brazen-mailed Saw this, delighted, and insulted us «.s And did us wrong. When now the spoil was shared The old man for himself reserved a herd Of oxen, and a numerous flock of sheep, — Three hundred, with their shepherds, —for to him Large debts were due in Elis. He had sent »sp Four horses once, of peerless speed, with cars, To win a tripod, the appointed prize. Augeias, king of men, detained them there, And sent the grieving charioteer away. My father, angered at the monarch's words «ss And acts, took large amends, and gave the rest To share among the people, that no one T

Page 306
306 The Iliad. Might leave the ground, defrauded of his right. All this was justly done, and we performed Due sacrifices to the gods, throughout «so The city ;— when the third day came, and brought The Epeians all at once, in all their strength, — Both men on foot and prancing steeds. With these Came the Molions twain, well armed, though young And yet untrained to war. There is a town «s Named Thryoessa, on a lofty hill Far off beside Alpheius, on the edge Of sandy Pylos. They beleaguered this, And sought to overthrow it. As they crossed The plain, Minerva came, a messenger, s7o By night from Mount Olympus, bidding us Put on our armor. Not unwillingly The Pyleans mustered, but in eager haste For battle. Yet did Neleus not consent That I should arm myself, — he hid my steeds; «7s For still he deemed me inexpert in war. Yet even then, although I fought on foot, I won great honor even among the knights; For so had Pallas favored me. A stream Named Minyeius pours into the sea «&, Near to Arena, where the Pylean knights Waited the coming of the holy morn, While those who fought on foot came thronging m. Thence, with our host complete, and all in arms, We marched, and reached at noon the sacred stream at

Page 307
Book XI. 307 Alpheius, where to Jove Omnipotent We offered chosen victims, and a bull To the river-god, another to the god Of ocean, and a heifer yet unbroke To blue-eyed Pallas. Then we banqueted, «90 In bands, throughout the army, and lay down In armor by the river-side to sleep. Meantime the brave Epeians stood around The city, resolute to lay it waste. But first was to be done a mighty work «9s Of war; for as the glorious sun appeared Above the earth we dashed against the foe, Praying to Jove and Pallas. When the fight Between the Eleans and the Pylean host Was just begun, I slew a youthful chief, — soo Mulius, —- and bore away his firm-paced steeds. The fair-haired Agamcde, eldest-born Of King Augeias' daughters, was his spouse; And well to her each healing herb was known That springs from the great earth. As he drew near, I smote him with my brazen lance: he fell To earth: I sprang into his car, and stood Among the foremost warriors; while, around, The brave Epeians, as they saw him fall, — The leader of their knights, their mightiest «,» In battle, — turned and, panic-stricken, fled, Each his own way. I followed on their flight Like a black tempest; fifty cars I took, And from each car I dashed two warriors down,

Page 308
3o8 The Iliad. Pierced by my spear. And now I should have slain The young Molions also, Actor's sons, 91« Had not their father, he who shakes the earth, Enshrouded them in mist, and hidden them From all pursuit. Then with victorious might Did Jove endue our arms, while we pursued *.» The foe across a region strewn with shields, — Slaying, and gathering spoil, — until our steeds Came to Buprasium, rich in fields of wheat, And to the Olenian rock, and to the hill Alesium in Colone. Pallas there 9»s Stayed our pursuit, and bade our host return. There slew I the last man, and left him there. And then the Achaians, guiding their swift steeds Homeward to Pylos from Euprasium, gave Great thanks to Jupiter among the gods, 930 And Nestor among men. Such was I then Among the heroes; but Achilles keeps His valor for himself alone, — and yet Bitterly must he grieve when he beholds Our people perish. O my friend! how well 93s Menoetius charged thee when he sent thee forth, From Phthia, to Atrides! We were both — The nobly born Ulysses and myself— Within the palace, and we clearly heard What he commanded thee. For we had come w To Peleus' stately dwelling, on our way Gathering a host in fertile Greece, and saw The great Menoetius there, and there we found

Page 309
Book XI. 309 Achilles with thee. There the aged knight Peleus was burning, in the palace-court, «s A steer's fat thighs to Jove the Thunderer, And lifted up a golden cup and poured Dark wine upon the blazing sacrifice. And both of you were busy with the flesh When we were at the threshold. As he saw 9*, Our coming, in surprise Achilles sprang Toward us, and took our hands and led us in, Bade us be seated, and before us placed The generous banquet due to stranger-guests. Then, having feasted, I began discourse, 9ss Exhorting you to join us. Both of you At once consented, and your fathers gave Their admonitions. Aged Peleus charged His son Achilles to excel the rest In valor, while Menoetius, in his turn, sks0 The son of Actor, gave thee this command : — "' My son, Achilles is the nobler born, But thou art elder. He surpasses thee By far in warlike might, but thou must prompt His mind with prudent counsels ; thou must warn #s And guide him ; he will hearken to thy words Meant for his good.' The old man charged thee thus. Thou hast forgotten it. Yet speak thou now To Peleus' warlike son; and haply he May heed thy counsels. Thou perchance mayst bend • wo

Page 310
The Iliad. His will — who knows ? — by thy persuasive words „ For wholesome are the warnings of a friend. Yet, if he shrink from some predicted doom, Or if his goddess-mother have revealed Aught of Jove's counsels to him, then, at least 97s Let him send thee to war, and let his troop Of Myrmidons go with thee, so that thou Mayst carry succor to the Greeks. Yet more, — Let him permit thee in the field to wear His glorious armor, that the Trojan host, »&, Beholding thee so like to him, may shun The combat, and the warlike sons of Greece, Hard-pressed, may breathe again, and find at length A respite from the conflict. Ye, who still Are fresh and vigorous, shall assault and drive 9«s Townward the weary foe from camp and fleet." He spake. The spirit of the youth took fire, And instantly he hastened toward the ships Of P.eleus' son. But when he came where lay The galleys of Ulysses the divine, w Where was the assembly-place and judgment-seat, And where the altars of the immortals stood, Evfemon's noble son, Eurypylus, Met him as from the battle-field he came Halting, and with an arrow in his thigh. 99s The sweat ran down his shoulders and his brow, And the black blood was oozing from his wound, Yet was his spirit untamed. The gallant youth, Son of Menoetius, saw with grief, and said :—

Page 311
Book XI. "Unhappy chiefs and princes of the Greeks! ™ Are ye then doomed to feast with your fair limbs The famished dogs of Ilium, far away From friends and country? Tell me, child of Jove, Gallant Eurypylus, will yet the Greeks Withstand the mighty Hector, or give way 100s And perish, overtaken by his spear?" And thus the wise Eurypylus replied :— "Nursling of Jove, Patroclus! for the Greeks There is no help, and all at their black ships Must perish; for within them even now ioio All those who were our bravest warriors lie, Wounded in close encounter, or from far, By Trojan hands, whose strength with every hour Becomes more terrible. Give now thine aid And take me to my ship, and cut away 101s The arrow from my thigh, and from the part Cleanse with warm water the dark blood, and shed Soothing and healing balms upon the wound, As taught thee by Achilles, who had learned The art from Chiron, righteous in his day i.=o. Beyond all other Centaurs. Now the leech Machaon lies, I think, among the tents, Wounded, and needs the aid of others' skill, And Podalirius out upon the plain Helps stem the onset of the Trojan host." i,»s Then spake the valiant Menoetiades :— "O brave Eurypylus! what yet will be The end of this, and what are we to do?

End of Section 13. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section 14
Page 312
3i2 The Iliad. Even now I bear a message on my way From reverend Nestor, guardian of the Greeks, 10*, To the great warrior, Peleus' son ; and yet I must not leave thee in thine hour of need." He spake; and, lifting in his arms the prince, He bore him to his tent. A servant spread, Upon his entering, hides to form a couch; ioss And there Patroclus laid him down and cut The rankling arrow from his thigh, and shed Warm water on the wound to cleanse away The purple blood, and last applied a root Of bitter flavor to assuage the smart, 1* Bruising it first within his palms : the pangs Ceased ; the wound dried ; the blood no longer flowed.</span>
			</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>