<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">THE BREAKING OF THE TRUCE, AND THE FIRST BATTLE</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">A Council of the Gods, who decide that the war shall go on.—Minerva sent down to cause the breaking of the truce.—Pandarus persuaded by her to aim an arrow at Menelaus, who is wounded by it, and healed by Machaon.—Exhortations of Agamemnon addressed to the Greek chiefs.—A furious battle, and great slaughter on both sides.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Meantime the immortal gods with Jupiter 1VJL Upon his golden pavement sat and held A council. Hebe, honored of them all, Ministered nectar, and from cups of gold They pledged each other, looking down on Troy. s When, purposely to kindle Juno's mood To anger, Saturn's son, with biting words That well betrayed his covert meanmg, spake :— "Two goddesses — the Argive Juno one, The other Pallas, her invincible friend — 10 Take part with Menelaus, yet they sit Aloof, content with looking on, while still Venus, the laughter-loving one, protects Her Paris, ever near him, warding off The stroke of fate. Just now she rescued him ,s When he was near his death. The victory Belongs to Menelaus, loved of Mars. Now let us all consider what shall be The issue, — whether we allow the war, With all its waste of life, to be renewed, x Or cause the warring nations to sit down In amity. .If haply it shall be The pleasure and the will of all the gods, Let Priam's city keep its dwellers still, And Menelaus lead his Helen home." »s He spake, but Juno and Minerva sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with closed lips repined, for secretly They plotted evil for the Trojan race. Minerva held her peace in bitterness Of heart and sore displeased with Father Jove. *, But Juno could not curb her wrath, and spake : — "What words, austere Saturnius, hast thou said! Wilt thou then render vain the toils I bear, And all my sweat? My very steeds even now Are weary with the mustering of the host c That threaten woe to Priam and his sons. Yet do thy will; but be at least assured That all the other gods approve it not." The cloud-compelling Jupiter replied In anger: "Pestilent one! what grievous wrong *, Hath Priam done to thee, or Priam's sons, That thou shouldst persevere to overthrow His noble city? Shouldst thou through the gates Of Ilium make thy way, and there devour, Within the ramparts, Priam and his sons 4s And all the men of Troy alive, thy rage Haply might be appeased. Do as thou wilt, So that this difference breed no lasting strife Between us. Yet I tell thee this, — and thou Bear what I say in mind: In time to come, *, Should I design to level in the dust Some city where men dear to thee are born, Seek not to thwart my vengeance, but submit. For now I fully yield me to thy wish, Though with unwilling mind. Wherever dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The race of humankind beneath the sun And starry heaven, of all their cities Troy Has been by me most honored, — sacred Troy, — And Priam, and the people who obey Priam, the wielder of the ashen spear; For there my altars never lacked their rites, — Feasts, incense, and libations duly paid." Then Juno, the majestic, with large eyes, Rejoined: "The cities most beloved by me Are three, — Mycenae, with her spacious streets, Argos, and Sparta. Raze them to the ground, If they be hateful to thee. I shall ne'er Contend to save them, nor repine to see Their fall; for, earnestly as I might seek To rescue them from ruin, all my aid Would not avail, so much the mightier thou. Yet doth it ill become thee thus to make My efforts vain. I am a goddess, sprung From the same stock with thee; I am the child Of crafty Saturn, and am twice revered, — Both for my birth and that I am the spouse Of thee who rulest over all the gods. Now let us each yield somewhat, — I to thee And thou to me; the other deathless gods Will follow us. Let Pallas be despatched To that dread battle-field on which are ranged The Trojans and Achaians, and stir up The Trojan warriors first to lift their hands Against the elated Greeks and break the league,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She ended, and the Father of the gods «s And mortals instantly complied, and called Minerva, and in winged accents said :— "Haste to the battle-field, and there, among The Trojan and Achaian armies, cause The Trojan warriors first to lift their hands 90 Against the elated Greeks and break the league." So saying, Jupiter to Pallas gave The charge she wished already. She in haste Shot from the Olympian summits, like a star Sent by the crafty Saturn's son to warn 9: The seamen or some mighty host in arms, — A radiant meteor scattering sparkles round. So came and lighted Pallas on the earth Amidst the armies. All who saw were seized With wonder, — Trojan knights and well-armed Greeks; ,«, And many a one addressed his comrade thus : — "Sure we shall have the wasting war again, And stubborn combats; or, it may be, Jove, The arbiter of wars among mankind, Decrees that the two nations dwell in peace." 10s So Greeks and Trojans said. The goddess went Among the Trojan multitude disguised; She seemed Laodocus, Antenor's son, A valiant warrior, seeking through the ranks For godlike Pandarus. At length she found no Lycaon's gallant and illustrious son, Standing with bucklered warriors ranged around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who followed him from where ^Esepus flows; And, standing near, she spake these winged words:— "Son of Lycaon! wilt thou hear my words, ,is Brave as thou art? Then wilt thou aim a shaft At Menelaus ; thus wilt thou have earned Great thanks and praise from all the men of Troy, And chiefly from Prince Paris, who will fill, Foremost of all, thy hands with lavish gifts, » When he shall look on Menelaus slain — The warlike son of Atreus — by thy hand, And laid upon his lofty funeral pile. Aim now at Menelaus the renowned An arrow, while thou offerest a vow «s To Lycian Phoebus, mighty with the bow, That thou wilt bring to him a hecatomb Of firstling lambs, when thou again shalt come Within thine own Zeleia's sacred walls." So spake Minerva, and her words o'ercame 110 The weak one's purpose. He uncovered straight His polished bow, made of the elastic horns Of a wild goat, which, from his lurking-place, As once it left its cavern lair, he smote, And pi reed its breast, and stretched it on the rock. Full sixteen palms in length the horns had grown From the goat's forehead. These an artisan Had smoothed, and, aptly fitting each to each, Polished the whole and tipped the work with gold. To bend that bow, the warrior lowered it 1*, And pressed an end against the earth. His friends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Held up, meanwhile, their shields before his face, Lest the brave sons of Greece should lift their spears Against him ere the champion of their host, The warlike Menelaus, should have felt ms The arrow. Then the Lycian drew aside The cover from his quiver, taking out A well-fledged arrow that had never flown, — A cause of future sorrows. On the string He laid that fatal arrow, while he made ,s» To Lycian Phoebus, mighty with the bow, A vow to sacrifice before his shrine A noble hecatomb of firstling lambs When he should come again to his abode Within his own Zeleia's sacred walls. ,%s Grasping the bowstring and the arrow's notch, He drew them back, and forced the string to meet His breast, the arrow-head to meet the bow, Till the bow formed a circle. Then it twanged. The cord gave out a shrilly sound; the shaft Leaped forth in eager haste to reach the host. Yet, Menelaus, then the blessed gods, The deathless ones, forgot thee not ; and first, Jove's daughter, gatherer of spoil, who stood Before thee, turned aside the deadly shaft. As when a mother, while her child is wrapped In a sweet slumber, scares away the fly, So Pallas turned the weapon from thy breast, And guided it to where the golden clasps Made fast the belt, and where the corselet's mail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was doubled. There the bitter arrow struck The belt, and through its close contexture passed, And fixed within the well-wrought corselet stood, Yet reached the plated quilt which next his skin The hero wore, — his surest guard against 17s The weapon's force, — and broke through that alike; And there the arrow gashed the part below, And the dark blood came gushing from the wound. As when some Carian or Mjeonian dame Tinges with purple the white ivory, i*, To form a trapping for the cheeks of steeds, — And many a horseman covets it, yet still It lies within her chamber, to become The onarment of some great monarch's steed And make its rider proud, — thy shapely thighs, '«s Thy legs, and thy fair ankles thus were stained, O Menelaus! with thy purple blood. When Agamemnon, king of men, beheld The dark blood flowing from his brother's wound, He shuddered. Menelaus, great in war, w, Felt the like horror; yet, when he perceived That still the arrow, neck and barb, remained Without the mail, the courage rose again That filled his bosom. Agamemnon, then, The monarch, sighing deeply, took the hand »w Of Menelaus, — while his comrades round Like him lamented, — sighing as he spake : — "Dear brother, when I sent thee forth alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To combat with the Trojans for the Greeks, I ratified a treaty for thy death, — *», Since now the Trojans smite and under foot Trample the league. Yet not in vain shall be The treaty, nor the blood of lambs, nor wine Poured to the gods, nor right hands firmly pledged; For though it please not now Olympian Jove ,** To make the treaty good, he will in time Cause it to be fulfilled, and they shall pay Dearly with their own heads and with their wives And children for this wrong. And this I know In my undoubting mind, — a day will come »,« When sacred Troy and Priam and the race Governed by Priam, mighty with the spear, Shall perish all. Saturnian Jove, who sits On high, a dweller of the upper air, Shall shake his dreadful a:gis in the sight «s Of all, indignant at this treachery. Such the event will be; but I shall grieve Bitterl}% Menelaus, if thou die, Thy term of life cut short. I shall go back To my dear Argos with a brand of shame ™, Upon me. For the Greeks will soon again Bethink them of their country; we shall then Leave Argive Helen to remain the boast Of Priam and the Trojans, — while thy bones Shall moulder, mingling with the earth of Troy, — »s Our great design abandoned. Then shall say Some haughty Trojan, leaping on the tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Menelaus :' So in time to come May Agamemnon wreak his wrath, as here He wreaked it, whither he had vainly led ^ An army, and now hastens to his home And his own land, with ships that bear no spoil, And the brave Menelaus left behind.' So shall some Trojan say; but, ere that time, May the earth open to receive my bones 1" 03 s The fair-haired Menelaus cheerfully Replied : " Grieve not, nor be the Greeks alarmed For me, since this sharp arrow has not found A vital part, but, ere it reached so far, The embroidered belt, the quilt beneath, and plate w Wrought by the armorer's cunning, broke its force." King Agamemnon took the word and said : — "Dear Menelaus! would that it were so, Yet the physician must explore thy wound, And with his balsams soothe the bitter pain." ms Then turning to Talthybius, he addressed The sacred herald : " Hasten with all speed, Talthybius; call Machaon, warrior-son Of /Esculapius, that much-honored leech, And bring him to the Achaian general, »s0 The warlike Menelaus, whom some hand Of Trojan or of Lycian, skilled to bend The bow, hath wounded with his shaft, — a deed For him to exult in, but a grief to us." He spake; nor failed the herald to obey, »ss But hastened at the word and passed among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The squadrons of Achaia, mailed in brass, In search of great Machaon. Him he found As midst the valiant ranks of bucklered men He stood, — the troops who followed him to war *», From Triccae, nurse of steeds. Then, drawing near, The herald spake to him in winged words :— "O son of /Esculapius, come in haste. King Agamemnon calls thee to the aid Of warlike Menelaus, whom some hand Of Trojan or of Lycian, skilled to bend The bow, hath wounded with his shaft, — a deed For him to exult in, but a grief to us." Machaon's heart was touched, and forth they went Through the great throng, the army of the Greeks. 10 And when they came where Atreus' warlike son Was wounded, they perceived the godlike man Standing amid a circle of the chiefs, The bravest of the Achaians, who at once Had gathered round. Without delay he drew »7s The arrow from the fairly-fitted belt. The barbs were bent in drawing. Then he loosed The embroidered belt, the quilted vest beneath, And plate, — the armorer's work, — and carefully O'erlooked the wound where fell the bitter shaft, *o Cleansed it from blood, and sprinkled over it With skill the soothing balsams which of yore The friendly Chiron to his father gave. While round the warlike Menelaus thus The chiefs were busy, all the Trojans moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into array of battle ; they put on Their armor, and were eager for the fight. Then wouklst thou not have seen, hadst thou been there, King Agamemnon slumbering, or in fear, And skulking from the combat, but alert, »*, Preparing for the glorious tasks of war. His horses, and his chariot bright with brass, He left, and bade Eurymedon, his groom, The son of Ptolemy Piraides, Hold them apart still panting, yet with charge ^s To keep them near their master, till the hour When he should need them, weary with the toil Of such a vast command. Meantime he went On foot among his files of soldiery, And whomsoe'er he found with fiery steeds 300 Hasting to battle, thus he cheered them on : — "O Argives! let not your hot courage cool, For Father Jove will never take the part Of treachery. Whosoe'er have been the first To break the league, upon their lifeless limbs w Shall vultures feast; and doubt not we shall bear Away in our good ships the wives they love And their young children, when we take their town." But whomsoe'er he saw that kept afar From the dread field, he angrily rebuked :— s» "O Argives! who with arrows only fight, Base as ye are, have ye no sense of shame? Why stand ye stupefied, like fawns, that, tired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With coursing the wide pastures, stop at last, Their strength exhausted! Thus ye stand amazed, Nor think of combat. Wait ye for the hour v* When to your ships, with their fair-sculptured prows, Moored on the borders of the hoary deep, The Trojans come, that haply ye may see If the great hand of Jove will shield you then?" s*, Thus Agamemnon, as supreme in power, Threaded the warrior-files, until he came Where stood the Cretans. All in arms they stood Around Idomeneus, the great in war. Like a wild boar in strength, he led the van, w And, in the rear, Meriones urged on His phalanxes. The king of men rejoiced, And blandly thus bespake Idomeneus :— "Idomeneus! I honor thee above The other knights of Greece, as well in war 330 As in all other labors, and no less In banquets, when the Achaian nobles charge Their goblets with the dark-red mingled wine In sign of honor. All the other Greeks Drink by a certain measure, but thy cup 33s Stands ever full, like mine, that thou mayst drink When thou desirest. Hasten to the war With all the valor thou dost glory in." The Cretan chief, Idomeneus, replied :— "Atrides, I remain thy true ally, 310 As I have pledged my faith. But thou exhort The other long-haired Greeks, and bid them rush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To combat, since the Trojans break their oath. For woe and death must be the lot of those Who broke the peace they vowed so solemnly." us He spake. The son of Atreus, glad at heart, Passed on among the squadrons, till he came To where the warriors Ajax formed their ranks For battle, with a cloud of infantry. As when some goatherd from the hill-top sees 3s» A cloud that traverses the deep before A strong west wind, — beholding it afar, Pitch-black it seems, and bringing o'er the waves A whirlwind with it; he is seized with fear, And drives his flock to shelter in a cave, — sss So with the warriors Ajax to the war Moved, dense and dark, the phalanxes of youths Trained for the combat, and their serried files Bristling with spears and shields. The king of men Saw with delight, and spake these winged words :— "O warriors Ajax, leaders of the Greeks 3«1 In brazen armor, I enjoin you not To rouse the courage of your soldiery. Such word would ill become me, for yourselves Have made your followers eager to engage 3«s In manful combat. Would to Jupiter, To Pallas, and Apollo, that there dwelt In every bosom such a soul as yours! Then would the city of King Priam fall At once, o'erthrown and levelled by our hands." 370 Thus having said, he left them and went on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To others. There he found the smooth of speech, Nestor, the Pylian orator, employed In marshalling his squadrons. Near to him Alastor and the large-limbed Pelagon, 37s Chromius, and Haemon, prince among his tribe, And Bias, shepherd of the people, stood. The cavalry with steeds and cars he placed In front. A vast and valiant multitude Of infantry he stationed in the rear, 3«0 To be the bulwark of the war. Between He made the faint of spirit take their place, That, though unwillingly, they might be forced To combat with the rest. And first he gave His orders to the horsemen, bidding them tfs To keep their coursers reined, nor let them range At random through the tumult of the crowd :— "And let no man, too vain of horsemanship, And trusting in his valor, dare advance Beyond the rest to attack the men of Troy, yr, Nor let him fall behind the rest, to make Our ranks the weaker. Whoso from his car Can reach an enemy's, let him stand and strike With his long spear, for't is the shrewder way. By rules like these, which their brave hearts obeycd, The men of yore laid level towns and towers." y* The aged man, long versed in tasks of war, Counselled them thus. King Agamemnon heard, Delighted, and in winged words he said :— "O aged man, would that thy knees were firm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is thy purpose, and thy strength as great 1 But age, the common fate of all, has worn Thy frame : would that some others had thy age, And thou wert of the number of our youths!" Then answered Nestor, the Gerenian knight: — "O son of Atreus, I myself could wish ** That I were now as when of yore I struck The high-born Ereuthalion down. The gods Bestow not all their gifts on man at once. If I were then a youth, old age in turn «,0 Is creeping o'er me. Still I keep among The knights, and counsel and admonish them, — The office of the aged. Younger men, They who can trust their strength, must wield the spear." He spake. The son of Atreus passed him by, 4,s Pleased with his words, and, moving onward, came Where — with the Athenians, ever prompt to raise The war-cry, grouped around him — stood the knight Menestheus, son of Peteus. Near to these Was wise Ulysses, with his sturdy band 4» Of Cephalonians. None of these had heard The clamor of the battle, for the hosts Of Trojan knights and Greeks had just begun To move, and there they waited for the advance Of other squadrons marching on to charge *,s The Trojans and begin the war anew. The king of men, Atrides, was displeased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spake, and chid them thus with winged words:— "O son of Peteus, foster-child of Jove, And thou, the man of craft and evil wiles 1 430 Why stand ye here aloof, irresolute, And wait for others? Ye should be the first To meet the foe and stem the battle's rage. I bid you first to banquets which the Greeks Give to their leaders, where ye feast at will 4e On roasted meats and bowls of pleasant wine. Now, ere ye move, ye willingly would see Ten Grecian squadrons join the deadly strife." The man of many arts, Ulysses, spake, m And frowned : " O Atreus' son! what words are thcse Which pass thy lips? How canst thou say that we Avoid the battle? Ever when the Greeks Seek bloody conflict with the Trojan knights, Thou, if thou wilt, and if thou givest heed To things like these, shalt with thine eyes behold us The father of Telemachus engaged In combat with the foremost knights that form The Trojan van. Thou utterest empty words." King Agamemnon, when he saw the chief Offended, changed his tone, and, smiling, said : — 4s» "Son of Laertes, nobly-born and wise Ulysses! It is not for me to chide Nor to exhort thee, for thy heart, I know, Counsels thee kindly toward me, and thy thought Agrees with mine. We will discuss all this •,s Hereafter. If just now too harsh a word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was uttered, may the immortals make it vain!" So saying, he departed, and went on To others. By his steeds and by his car, That shone with fastenings of brass, he found 4*, The son of Tydeus, large-souled Diomed, And Sthenelus, the son of Capaneus, Standing beside him. Looking at them both, King Agamemnon to Tydides spake In winged words, and thus reproved the chief:—«ss "O son of Tydeus, that undaunted knight! What is there to appall thee? Why look through The spaces that divide the warlike ranks? Not thus did Tydeus feel the touch of fear, But ever foremost of his warriors fought. «o So they declare who saw his deeds, for I Was never with him, nor have ever seen The hero. Yet they say that he excelled All others. Certain is it that he once Entered Mycenae as a friendly guest, 47s With no array of soldiery, but came With godlike Polynices. 'T was the time When warrior-bands were gathered to besiege The sacred walls of Thebes, and earnestly They prayed that from Mycenae they might lead 4*, Renowned auxiliars to the war, and we Would willingly have given the aid they asked, — For we approved the prayer, —but Jove, with signs Of angry omen, changed our purposes. The chiefs departed, journeying on to where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asopus flows through reeds and grass, and thence The Achaians sent an embassy to Thebes By Tydeus. There he met the many sons Of Cadmus at the banquets in the hall Of valiant Eteocles. Though alone 450 Among so many, and a stranger guest, The hero feared them not, but challenged them To vie with him in games; and easily He won the victory, such aid was given By Pallas. Then the sons of Cadmus, skilled 4r3 In horsemanship, were wroth, and privily Sent fifty armed youths to lie in wait For his return. Two leaders had the band, — Maion, the son of Harmon, like a god In form, and Lycophontes, brave in war, s0» Son of Autophonos. A bloody death Did Tydeus give the youths. He slew them all Save Maion, whom he suffered to return, Obedient to an omen from the gods. Such was /Etolian Tydeus; but his son, s0s A better speaker, is less brave in war." He spake; and valiant Diomed, who heard The king's reproof with reverence, answered not. Then spake the son of honored Capaneus : — "Atrides, speak not falsely, when thou know'st s10 The truth so well. Assuredly we claim To be far braver than our fathers were. We took seven-gated Thebes with fewer troops Than theirs, when, trusting in the omens sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From heaven, and in the aid of Jupiter, so We led our men beneath the city walls Sacred to Mars. Our fathers perished there Through their own folly. Therefore never seek To place them in the same degree with us." The brave Tydides with a frown replied : —- s*, "Nay, hold thy peace, my friend, and heed my words. Of Agamemnon I will not complain, — The shepherd of the people; it is his To exhort the well-armed Greeks to gallant deeds. Great glory will attend him if the Greeks s,s Shall overcome the Trojans, and shall take The sacred Ilium; but his grief will be Bitter if we shall fail and be destroyed. Hence think we only of the furious charge!" He spake, and from his chariot leaped to earth s30 All armed; the mail upon the monarch's breast Rang terribly as he marched swiftly on. The boldest might have heard that sound with fear. As when the ocean-billows, surge on surge, Are pushed along to the resounding shore s3s Before the western wind, and first a wave Uplifts itself, and then against the land Dashes and roars, and round the headland peaks Tosses on high and spouts its spray afar, So moved the serried phalanxes of Greece s« To battle, rank succeeding rank, each chief Giving command to his own troops; the rest Marched noiselessly: you might have thought no voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was in the breasts of all that mighty throng, So silently they all obeyed their chiefs, s4s Their showy armor glittering as they moved In firm array. But, as the numerous flock Of some rich man, while the white milk is drawn Within his sheepfold, hear the plaintive call Of their own lambs, and bleat incessantly, —, ss0 Such clamors from the mighty Trojan host Arose; nor was the war-cry one, nor one The voice, but words of mingled languages, For they were called from many different climes- These Mars encouraged to the fight; but those sss The blue-eyed Pallas. Terror too was there, And Fright, and Strife that rages unappeased, — Sister and comrade of man-slaying Mars, — Who rises small at first, but grows, and lifts Her head to heaven and walks upon the earth. 5* She, striding through the crowd and heightening The mutual rancor, flung into the midst Contention, source of bale to all alike. And now, when met the armies in the field, The ox-hide shields encountered, and the spears, s«s And might of warriors mailed in brass ; then clashed The bossy bucklers, and the battle-din Was loud; then rose the mingled shouts and groans Of those who slew and those who fell; the earth Ran with their blood. As when the winter streams Rush down the mountain-sides, and fill, below, s-, With their swift waters, poured from gushing springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some hollow vale, the shepherd on the heights Hears the far roar, — such was the mingled din That rose from the great armies when they met. s73 Then first Antilochus, advancing, struck The Trojan champion Echepolus down, Son of Thalysius, fighting in the van. He smote him on the helmet's cone, where streamed The horse-hair plume. The brazen javelin stood s* Fixed in his forehead, piercing through the bone, And darkness gathered o'er his eyes. He fell As falls a tower before some stubborn siege. Then Elephenor, son of Chalcodon, Prince of the brave Abrantes, by the foot ss&gt; Seized the slain chieftain, dragging him beyond The reach of darts, to strip him of his arms; Yet dropped him soon, for brave Agenor saw, And, as he stooped to drag the body, hurled His brazen spear and pierced the uncovered side s*, Seen underneath the shield. At once his limbs Relaxed their hold, and straight the spirit fled. Then furious was the struggle of the Greeks And Trojans o'er the slain; they sprang like wolves Upon each other, and man slaughtered man. sw Then by the hand of Ajax Telamon Fell Simoisius, in the bloom of youth, Anthemion's son. His mother once came down From Ida, with her parents, to their flocks Beside the Simois; there she brought him forth a,» Upon its banks, and gave her boy the name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Simoisius. Unrequited now Was all the care with which his parents nursed His early years, and short his term of life, — Slain by the hand of Ajax, large of soul. *,s For, when he saw him coming, Ajax smote Near the right pap the Trojan's breast; the blade Passed through, and out upon the'further side. He fell among the dust of earth, as falls A poplar growing in the watery soil Of some wide marsh, — a fair, smooth bole, with boughs Only on high, which with his gleaming axe Some artisan has felled to bend its trunk Into the circle of some chariot-wheel; Withering it lies upon the river's bank. «is So did the high-born Ajax spoil the corpse Of Simoisius, Anthemion's son. But Antiphus, the son of Priam, clad In shining armor, saw, and, taking aim, Cast his sharp spear at Ajax through the crowd. «*, The weapon struck him not, but pierced the groin Of one who was Ulysses' faithful friend,— Leucus, — as from the spot he dragged the dead; He fell, the body dropping from his hold. Ulysses, stung with fury at his fall, ,s Rushed to the van, arrayed in shining brass, Drew near the foe, and, casting a quick glance Around him, hurled his glittering spear. The host Of Trojans, as it left his hand, shrank back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon each other. Not in vain it flew, But struck Democoon, the spurious son Of Priam, who, to join the war, had left Abydos, where he tended the swift mares. Ulysses, to revenge his comrade's death, Smote him upon the temple with his spear. ts Through both the temples passed the brazen point, And darkness gathered o'er his eyes; he fell, His armor clashing round him with his fall. Then did the foremost bands, and Hector's self, Fall back. The Argives shouted, dragging off «« The slain, and rushing to the ground they won. Then was Apollo angered, looking down From Pergamus, and thus he called aloud : — "Rally, ye Trojans! tamers of fleet steeds! Yield not the battle to the Greeks. Their limbs ,*s Are not of stone or iron, to withstand The trenchant steel ye wield. Nor does the son Of fair-haired Thetis now, Achilles, take Part in the battle, but sits, brooding o'er The choler that devours him, in his ships." «s« Thus from the city spake the terrible god. Meantime Tritonian Pallas, glorious child Of Jupiter, went through the Grecian ranks Where'er they wavered, and revived their zeal. Diores, son of Amarynceus, then Met his hard fate. The fragment of a rock Was thrown by hand at his right leg, and struck The ankle. Piroiis, son of Imbrasus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who came from /Enus, leading to the war His Thracian soldiers, flung it; and it crushed i*» Tendons and bones, and down the warrior fell In dust, and toward his comrades stretched his hands, And gasped for breath. But he who gave the wound, Prroiis, came up and pierced him with his spear. Forth gushed the entrails, and the eyes grew dark. «s But Piroiis by /Etolian Thoas fell, Who met him with his spear and pierced his breast Above the pap. The brazen weapon stood Fixed in the lungs. Then Thoas came and plucked The massive spear away, and drew his sword, «-0 And thrusting through him the sharp blade, he took His life away. Yet could he not despoil The slain man of his armor, for around His comrades thronged, the Thracians, with their tufts Of streaming hair, and, wielding their long spears, «7s Drove him away. And he, though huge of limb, And valiant and renowned, was forced to yield To numbers pressing on him, and withdrew. Thus near each other stretched upon the ground Pkoiis, the leader of the Thracian band, ,*, And he who led the Epeans, brazen-mailed Diores, lay with many others slain. Then could no man, who near at hand beheld The battle of that day, see cause of blame In aught, although, unwounded and unbruised ,ws By weapons, Pallas led him by the hand In safety through the midst, and turned aside The violence of javelins; for that day Saw many a Trojan slain, and many a Greek, Stretched side by side upon the bloody field.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
