<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"/>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-15" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>NOW when the Trojans in theirflight had crossed Rampart and trench, and many had been slain By the pursuing Greeks, they made a halt Beside their chariots, in despair and pale With terror. Meanwhile Jupiter awoke, s On Ida's height, from slumber by the side Of Juno, goddess of the golden throne. At once he rose and saw the Trojan host Routed, and, following close upon their flight, The Argive warriors putting them to rout, ,0 Aided by Neptune, sovereign of the sea, And Hector lying on the field among His fellow-warriors, breathing painfully, Vomiting blood, and senseless, for the arm That smote was not the feeblest of the Greeks. The Father of immortals and of men Beheld and pitied him, and terribly Frowned upon Juno, and bespake her thus : — "O evil minded Juno, full of guile! Thy arts have made the noble Hector leave » The combat, and have forced his troops to flee. I know not whether't were not well that thou Shouldst taste the fruit of thy pernicious wiles, Chastised by me with stripes. Dost thou forget When thou didst swing suspended, and I tied »s Two anvils to thy feet, and bound a chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gold that none could break around thy wrists? Then didst thou hang in air amid the clouds, And all the gods of high Olympus saw With pity. They stood near, but none of them 30 Were able to release thee. Whoso came Within my reach I seized, and hurled him o'er Heaven's threshold, and he fell upon the earth Scarce breathing. Yet the passion of my wrath, Caused by the wrongs of godlike Hercules, 3s Was not to be so calmed; for craftily Hadst thou called up the violent northern blast, To chase him far across the barren deep, And drive him from his course to populous Cos. I rescued him at length, and brought him back *, To Argos famed for steeds, though after long And many hardships. I remind thee now Of this, that thou mayst see of what avail Hereafter thy dissembled love and all Thy cunning strategies will be to thee." « He spake, and Juno, large-eyed and august, Shuddered, and answered Jove with winged words: — "Be witness, Earth, and the great Heavens above, And waters of the Styx that glide beneath,— That dreadful oath which most the blessed gods s» Revere, — be witness, too, that sacred head Of thine, and our own nuptial couch, by which I would not rashly swear at any time, That not by my persuasion Neptune went—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shaker of the shores — to harass Troy s5 And Hector, and to aid the cause of Greece. He went self-counselled; he had seen the Greeks Pressed grievously beside their fleet, and took Compassion on them. Yet would I advise That he obey thy word, and take his place «0 Where thou, the Cloud compeller, bid'st him go." She ended, and the Father of the gods And mortals smiled, and said, in winged words : — "Large-eyed, imperial Juno, wouldst thou sit In council with the immortals, and assist '3 My purposes, then Neptune, though at heart He were averse, would yet conform his will To mine and thine. If thou dost truly speak, And from thy heart, go now to where the gods Assemble, summon Iris, and with her 70 The archer-god Apollo. Give in charge To Iris that she hasten to the host Of the mailed Greeks, and bid king Neptune leave, The battle for his palace. Let the god Phoebus, preparing Hector for the fight, « Breathe strength into his frame, that so he lose The sense of pain which bows his spirit now, And he shall force the Greeks again to flee In craven fear. Then shall their flying host Fall back upon the galleys of the son *0 Of Peleus, who shall send into the fight His friend Patroclus. Him the mighty spear Of Hector shall o'erthrow before the walls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ilium, after many a Trojan youth Shall by his hand have fallen, and with them «3 My noble son, Sarpedon. Roused to rage, Then shall the great Achilles take the 'life Of Hector. Be it from this time my care That all the assaults of Trojans in the fleet Be beaten back, till by Minerva's aid *, The Greeks possess the lofty town of Troy. Still am I angry, nor will I allow One of the ever-living gods to aid The Greeks, until the prayer of Peleus' son Shall fully be accomplished, as my word 9s And nod were given, when Thetis clasped my knees, Entreating me to honor, signally, Her son, Achilles, spoiler of walled towns." He spake; the white-armed goddess willingly - Obeyed him, and from Ida's summit flew 100 To high Olympus. As the thought of man Flies rapidly, when, having travelled far, He thinks, " Here would I be, I would be there," And flits from place to place, so swiftly flew Imperial Juno to the Olympian mount, 10s And there she found the ever-living gods Assembled in the halls of Jupiter. These, as they saw her, starting from their seats, Reached forth their cups to greet her. All the rest She overlooked, and took the beaker held no By blooming Themis, who in haste had run To meet her, and in winged accents said:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Why comest thou, O Juno! with the look Of one o'ercome with fear. Hath Saturn's son, Thy lord, disquieted thy soul with threats?" ns The white-armed goddess Juno answered her : — "Ask me not, heavenly Themis, — thou dost know The cruel, arrogant temper that is his, — But sit presiding at the common feast, In this fair palace of the gods, and thou ,*, And all in heaven shall hear what evils Jove Has threatened. All, I think, will not rejoice To hear the tidings, be they gods or men, Though some contentedly are feasting now." Thus having said, imperial Juno took us Her place, and all the gods within the halls Of Jupiter were grieved. The goddess smiled, But only with the lips ; her forehead wore Above the jetty brows no sign of joy, While thus she spake in anger to the rest : — 130 "Vainly, and in our madness, do we strive With Father Jove. We come and seek by craft Or force to move his stubborn will ; he sits Apart, unyielding, unregarding, proud Of the vast strength and power in which he stands Above all other of the deathless gods. •# Bear therefore patiently whatever ill He sends to each. Already, as I learn, Hath Mars his share of sorrow. In the war Ascalaphus hath perished, whom he loved i*, Dearly, beyond all other men, and whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fiery god acknowledged as his son." As thus she spake, Mars smote his sinewy thighs With his dropped hands, and sorrowfully said :— "Be not offended with me, ye who make us Your dwelling on Olympus, if I go Down to the Achaian fleet, and there avenge The slaughter of my son, though I be doomed To fall before the thunderbolt of Jove, And lie in blood and dust among the dead." »s» He spake, and summoned Fear and Flight to yoke His steeds, and put his glorious armor on. Then greater and more terrible had been The avenging wrath of Jupiter inflamed Against the gods, if Pallas in her fear iss For all the heavenly dwellers had not left Her throne, and, rushing through the portals, snatched The helmet from his head, and from his arm The shield, and from his brawny hand the spear, And laid the brazen weapon by, and thus ,,», Rebuked the fiery temper of the god :— "Thou madman, thou art frantic, thou art los\.! Hast thou not ears to hear, nor any shame Nor reason left? Hast thou not heard the Ivor 's Of white-armed Juno, who so lately left "s Olympian Jupiter? Wouldst thou return In pain and sorrow to the Olympian heights, Driven back ingloriously, and made the cause Of many miseries to all the gods ?—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Jove would leave the Trojans and their foes, 17» The gallant Greeks, and turn on us, and bring Ruin upon Olympus. He would seize Guilty and guiltless in his rage alike. Wherefore I counsel thee to lay aside Resentment for the slaughter of thy son, 17s Since braver men and stronger have been slain, And will be slain hereafter. Vain it were To seek from death to save the race of man." She said, and, leading back the fiery Mars, Seated him on his throne, while Juno called no Apollo forth, with Iris, messenger Of heaven, and thus in winged accents spake :— "Jove calls you both to Ida. When ye reach Its heights, and look upon his countenance, Receive his sovereign mandate and obey." 1«s So spake imperial Juno, and withdrew And took her seat again, while they in haste Flew toward the mount of Ida, seamed with rills And nurse of savage beasts. Upon the top Of Gargarus they found the Thunderer, ,*, The son of Saturn, sitting. In a cloud Of fragrant haze he sat concealed ; the twain Entered and stood before the God of Storms, Who saw them not displeased, so speedily Had they obeyed his consort. First he turned us To Iris, and in winge:l accents said : — "Haste thee, swift Iris, and report my words To royal Neptune, and report them right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bid him, withdrawing from the battle-field, Repair to the assembly of the gods, *» Or the great ocean. If he disobey, Contemning my command, then bid him think Maturely, whether, mighty though he be, He can withstand when I put forth my power Against him. Greater is my strength than his, a0s And elder-born am I. Yet in his pride Of heart he dares to call himself my peer, Though all the others look on me with awe." Thus spake the god, and Iris, whose swift feet Are like the wind, obeyed, and downward plunged From Ida's height to sacred T roy. As when Snow-flakes or icy hail are dropped to earth From clouds before the north wind when it sweeps The sky, so darted Iris to the ground, And stood by mighty Neptune's side, and said :— "O dark-haired shaker of the shores, I bring «s A message from the /Egis-bearer, Jove, That thou, withdrawing from the battle-field, Repair to the assembly of the gods, Or the great ocean. If thou disobey, Contemning his command, then hear his threat: He will come hither and put forth his power Against thee, and he warns thee not to tempt The strife ; for greater is his power than thine, And he is elder-born, though in thy pride itj Of heart thou dost declare thyself the peer Of him whom all the rest regard with awe."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Illustrious Neptune answered with disdain :— "In truth an arrogant speech; he seeks by forte To bar me from my purpose, who can claim n» Rights equal to his own, though great his power. We are three brothers, — Rhea brought us forth, — The sons of Saturn,—Jupiter, and I, And Pluto, regent of the realm below. Three parts were made of all existing things, »» And each of us received his heritage. The lots were shaken; and to me it fell To dwell forever in the hoary deep, And Pluto took the gloomy realm of night, And, lastly, Jupiter the ample heaven «0 And air and clouds. Yet doth the earth remain, With high Olympus, common to us all. Therefore I yield me not to do his will, Great as he is ; and let him be content With his third part. He cannot frighten me «s With gestures of his arm. Let him insult With menaces the daughters and the sons Of his own loves, and give them law, since they Perforce must hear, and patiently submit." Then the fleet-footed Iris spake again : — »?, "O dark-haired Neptune, shall I bear from thee This harsh, defiant answer back to Jove, Or shall it yet be changed? The prudent mind Yields to the occasion, and thou knowest well The Furies wait upon the elder-born." Then spake in turn the god who shakes the shores: —</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"0 goddess Ins, thou hast wisely said. An excellent thing it is when messengers Know how to counsel well. But in my heart And soul a wrathful sense of injury Arises when he chides with insolent words Me, who was equal with him in my lot, And born to equal destinies. Yet now, Although offended, I give way; but this I tell thee, and't is from my heart, — if he, In spite of me and Pallas, spoiler-queen, And Juno, Mercury, and Vulcan, spare The towers of Troy, — if he refuse to bring Ruin on her, and glory on the Greeks, Then let him know that hatred without end Or intermission is between us two." As thus he spake, the shaker of the shores Quitted the Grecian army, took his way Seaward, and plunged into the deep. The host Perceived their loss. Then Cloud-compelling J( Turned to Apollo and addressed him thus : — "Now go at once to Hector, mailed in brass, Beloved Phoebus, for the god who shakes The earth, departing to the ocean-deeps, Avoids our wrath; else had the other gods, Even they who far beneath the earth surround Oltl Saturn, heard our quarrel. Well it is For both of us that he, although enraged, Braved not my arm, for otherwise the strife Had not been ended without sweat. Now take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fringed aegis in thy hands, and shake Its orb before the warrior Greeks, to fill Their hearts with fear. I give, O archer-god, Illustrious Hector to thy charge. Revive The might that dwelt within him, till the Greeks « Reach, in their flight, the fleet and Hellespont; Then shall it be my care, by word and deed, To give them rest and respite from their toils." He spake: Apollo hearkened and obeyed His father, darting down from Ida's height *,$ Like the fleet falcon, chaser of the dove, And swiftest of the race of birds. He found Hector, the warlike Priam's noble 6on, No longer on his bed. He sat upright; The life was coming back; he knew again 390 His friends ; the heavy breathing ceased ; the sweat Was stanched ; the will of aegis-bearing Jove Revived the warrior's strength. The archer-god, Phoebus, approached, and, standing by him, said :— "Why, Hector, son of Priam, dost thou sit w Languishing thus, apart from all the host? Has aught of evil overtaken thee?" And then the crested Hector feebly said: "Who mayst thou be, O kindest of the gods, That thus dost question me? Hast thou not heard That the great warrior Ajax, with a stone, 3" Smote me upon the breast, and made me leave The battle-field, where I o'ertook and slew His comrades by the galleys of the Greeks?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought to be this day among the dead s•s In Pluto's mansion ; even now it seemed That I was breathing my dear life away." Then spake again Apollo, archer-god :— "Take courage, for the son of Saturn sends From Ida's summit one who will attend j*, And aid thee, — Phoebus of the golden sword, Long practised to defend thy Troy and thee. Rise now, encouraging thy numerous host Of charioteers to press with their swift steeds Straight toward the roomy galleys of the Greeks, I go before to smooth for them the way, And turn the Achaian bands, and make them flee." He spake, and into the great ruler's breast Breathed strength and courage. As a stabled horse, Fed at his crib with barley, breaks the thong 330 That fastened him, and, issuing, scours the plain Where he was wont in some smooth-flowing stream To bathe his sides, —he holds his head aloft Proudly, and o'er his shoulders streams the mane, — Consciously beautiful, he darts away 33; On nimble knees, that bear him to the fields He knows so well, and pastures of the mares ; — So after he had hearkened to the god Moved the swift feet of Hector, and he flew To cheer his horsemen on. As peasant men 3*, Rush with their dogs in chase of horned stag Or mountain goat, whose refuge is among Thickets and lofty rocks, nor can they take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their prey, for at their clamor there appears A maned lion in the way, and turns 3« The chasers back, although in hot pursuit, — Thus did the Greeks embattled close pursue The men of Ilium, striking with their swords And two-edged spears ; but when at length they saw Hector among the ranks of armed men, 3s» Their hearts were troubled, and their courage sank. Thoas, Andrannon's son, the bravest far Among the /Etolians, skilled to cast the spear And combat hand to hand, addressed the Greeks. In council few excelled him, when the youths j;s Assembled for debate. With prudent speech Thoas bespake his fellow-warriors thus :— "Gods! what a marvel do mine eyes behold; Hector has risen from death! We fully thought, Each one of us, that, smitten by the hand w Of Telamonian Ajax, he had died. Some god hath rescued and restored to strength This Hector who hath slain, and yet will slay, I fear, so many Greeks. He comes not thus Leading the charge without the aid of Jove, y,s The God of Thunders. Now let all of us Follow this counsel: bid the multitude Retreat upon the ships, and let the rest, Who boast ourselves the bravest of the host, Stand firm and breast his onset, and so break .370 Its fury with our lifted spears. I think, With all his rage, he will be slow to fling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself into a band of armed Greeks." He spake ; they hearkened and at once complied j The Ajaxes, the Prince Idomeneus, vs Teucer, Meriones, and Meges, peer Of Mars, assembled all the chiefs, and ranked Their files to encounter Hector and his band Of Trojans, while the multitude fell back To the Greek galleys. Then, in close array, *0 The Trojan host moved forward. Hector led The van in rapid march. Before him walked Phoebus, the terrible aegis in his hands Dazzlingly bright within its shaggy fringe, By Vulcan forged, the great artificer, s And given to Jupiter, with which to rout Armies of men. With this in hand he led The assailants on. The Achaians kept their ground In serried ranks, and a sharp yell arose i*• From Greeks and Trojans. Arrows from the string Flew through the air, and spears from valiant hands. Some pierced the breasts of warrior-youths, but more Fell half-way ere they reached their aim, and plunged Into the ground, still hungering for their prey. As long as Phoebus held the aegis still, 3« The weapons reached and wounded equally Both armies, and in both the people fell; But ever when the god looked face to face On the Greek knights, and shook the orb, and gave A mighty shout, he made their hearts to sink *» Within their bosoms, and their courage fled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when two beasts of prey at dead of night Suddenly, while their keeper is away, Scatter a herd of beeves or flock of sheep, So the disheartened Greeks were put to rout, *,s For Phoebus sent among them fear, and gave Victory to Hector and the men of Troy. Then, as the lines were broken, man slew man. First Stichius fell by Hector's hand, and next Arcesilaus ; one was chief among i10 The mailed Boeotians, one the trusty friend Of brave Menestheus. Medon fell before /Eneas, and with him Iasus died. Medon was great Otleus' base-born son, And Ajax was his brother, and he dwelt 4's In Phylace, an exile, for his hand Had slain the brother of his father's wife, The step-dame Eriopis, late espoused. Iasus was appointed to command The warriors sent from Athens, and he claimed 4*, His birth from Sphelus, son of Bucolus. Mecistes fell before Polydamas. Polites struck down Echius in the van, And Clonius died by great Agenor's hand; And Paris, when Deiochus had turned. 43s To flee, among the foremost combatants, Smote him upon the shoulder from behind, And drave the brazen weapon through his heart . Then, while the Trojans stripped the dead, the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fled every way, and, falling as they ran m Into the trench and on the stakes, were driven Back o'er the rampart. Hector lifted up His mighty voice, and bade the Trojans leave The bloody spoil and hasten to the ships. "And whomsoever I shall find apart «s In any place, at distance from the ships, There will I slay him. None of all his kin, Women or men, shall build his funeral pile, But dogs shall tear his limbs in sight of Troy." He spake; and on the shoulders of his steeds «*, He laid the lash, and urged them toward the foe, And cheered the Trojans on. They joined their shouts To his, and charged with all their steeds and cars; And fearful was the din. Apollo marched Before them, treading down with mighty feet *c The banks of the deep ditch, and casting them Back to the middle, till a causey rose, Broad, and of length like that to which a spear Reaches when thrown by one who tries his strength. O'er this the Trojans poured into the camp «s0 By squadrons, with Apollo still in front, Holding the marvellous segis. He with ease O'erthrew the rampart. As a boy at play Among the sea-shore sands in childish sport Scatters with feet and hands the little mounds 4ss He reared, thus didst thou cause the mighty work, O archer Phoebus, which the Greeks had reared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With so much toil, to crumble. Thou didst fill Their hearts with eager thoughts of flight, till, hemmed 4s5 Between the assailants and their ships, they stopped And bade each other stand, and raised their hands To all the gods, and offered vows aloud. Gerenian Nestor, guardian of the Greeks, With arms extended toward the starry skies, Prayed earnestly: "O Father Jove, if e'er 4os In fruitful Argos there were burned to thee The thighs of fattened oxen or of sheep, By one who asked a safe return to Greece, And thou didst promise it, remember him, God of Olympus, and avert from us 470 The day of evil. Suffer not the Greeks To perish, slaughtered by the sons of Troy." So spake he supplicating. Jupiter The All-disposer thundered as he heard The old man's prayer. The Trojans by that voice Of aegis-bearing Jove were moved to press 47« The Greeks more resolutely, and were filled With fiercer valor. As a mighty wave On the great ocean, driven before a gale Such as rolls up the hugest billow, sweeps 4s» O'er the ship's side, so swept the Trojan host With dreadful tumult o'er the wall. They drave Their steeds into the camp, and there they fought Beside the galley-sterns, and hand to hand, With two-edged spears, — they from their cars, the Greeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From their black ships on high with long-stemm poles Which lay upon the decks, prepared for fight At sea, and strongly joined to blades of brass. Patroclus, while the Greeks and Trojans fought Around the wall, at distance from the fleet 490 Sat with the brave Eurypylus in his tent, Amusing him with pleasant talk, and dressed His wound with balms that calmed the bitter pain. But when he saw the Trojans bursting in Over the wall, and heard the din, and saw m The Achaians put to rout, he gave a cry Of sudden grief, and with his open hands Smote both his thighs, and sorrowfully said : — "Eurypylus, I cannot stay with thee, Much as thou needest me, for desperate grows s0» The struggle. Now let thine attendant take The charge of thee. I hasten to persuade Achilles to the field. Who knows but I, With Jove's good help, may change his purpose yet? For potent are the counsels of a friend." its The hero spake, and instantly his feet Bore him away. Meanwhile the Achaian host Firmly withstood the onset of their foes. And yet, though greater was their multitude, They could not drive the Trojans from the fleet, s10 Nor could the Trojans break, with all their power, The serried lines, and reach the tents and ships. As when a plumb-line, in the skilful hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of shipwright well instructed in his art By Pallas, squares the beam that builds a bark, s»s So even was the fortune of the fray. While some beside one galley waged the war, And others round another, Hector came To encounter Ajax the renowned, and both Fought for one ship. The Trojan could not drive The Greek away, and burn his ship with fire, pi Nor the Greek drive the Trojan, for a god Had brought him thither. Then did Ajax smite Caletor, son of Clytius, with his spear Upon the breast, as he was bringing fire y,s To burn the ship; he dropped the torch, and fell, With clashing armor. Hector, as he saw His kinsman lying slain amid the dust By the black galley, raised his voice, and thus Called to the Lycians and the men of Troy : — sr, "Hear, men of Troy and Lycia, and ye sons Of Dardanus, who combat hand to hand, Stand firm, and never yield this narrow ground. Rescue the son of Clytius, who has fallen Before the ships, nor let the Achaians make sn His arms their spoil." The hero spake, and aimed His shining spear at Ajax, whom it missed, But smote Lycophron, Master's son, who served Ajax, and dwelt with him, for he had left His native land, Cythera, having slain s40 One of the gallant Cytherean race. Him Hector smote upon the head beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ear with his keen weapon, as he stood Near Ajax ; from the galley's stern he fell Headlong upon the ground, with lifeless limbs. s4s Then to his brother Teucer Ajax spake :— "Dear Teucer, see, our faithful friend is gone, The son of Mastor, from Cythera's isle, Whom we had learned to honor equally With our own parents in our palaces. ss0 He falls before the great-souled Hector's hand. Where, then, are now thy shafts that carry death, And where the bow that Phoebus gave to thee?" He spake, and Teucer, hearkening, came in haste, With his bent bow, and quiver full of shafts, sss And, standing near him, sent his arrows forth Among the Trojan warriors. There he smote Clitus, Pisenor's eminent son, the friend Of the renowned Polydamas, who claimed His birth from Panthoiis. Clitus held the reins, 9s0 Guiding the coursers of Polydamas Where most the crowded Grecian phalanxes Wavered and broke, that so he might support Hector and his companions. Soon he met, Brave as he was, disaster which no hand 93s Had powrer to avert: the bitter arrow struck His neck behind, and from the chariot-seat He fell to earth ; the startled steeds sprang back; The empty chariot rattled. This the king Polydamas perceived, and came to meet b» His steeds, and gave them to Astinoiis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son of Protiaon, charging him To keep them ever near, and in his sight, While he, returning, mingled with the throng That struggled in the van. Then Teucer aimed m Another shaft at Hector mailed in brass, Which, had it reached him fighting gallantly, Had made him leave the battle, for his life Had ended there. The act was not unseen By All-disposing Jupiter, whose power s*, Protected Hector, and denied the Greek The glory hoped for; for he snapped in twain The firmly twisted cord as Teucer drew That perfect bow; the brazen arrow flew Aside; the warrior's hands let fall the bow, s«s And, shuddering, he bespake his brother thus : — "Now woe is me! some deity, no doubt, Brings all our plans to nought. T is he whose touch Strikes from my hand the bow, and snaps in twain The cord just twisted, which I bound myself » This morning to the bow, that it might bear The frequent arrow bounding toward the foe." He spake, and thus replied the man of might, The Telamonian Ajax: "Lay aside Thy bow, my brother, and thy store of shafts, ms Since, in displeasure with the Greeks, a god Has made them useless. Haste to arm thy hand With a long spear, and on thy shoulders lay A buckler, and with these attack the foe, And bid thy fellows stand. Let Trojans see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, even though the day thus far be theirs, They cannot lay their hands on our good ships Without a mighty struggle. Let us all Be mindful of our fame for gallant deeds." He spake, and Teucer went to place the bow «0s Within the tents, and on his shoulders hung A fourfold shield, and placed on his grand brows A stately helmet with a horse-hair crest That nodded fearfully. He took in hand A ponderous spear with brazen blade, and sprang^o Forward with hasty steps, and stood beside His brother Ajax. Hector, when he saw That Teucer's shafts had failed him, called aloud Upon the men of Lycia and of Troy :— "Ye men of Troy and Lycia, and ye sons Of Dardanus who combat hand to hand, Acquit yourselves like men, my friends, and prove Your fiery valor by these roomy ships; For I have seen with mine own eyes the shafts Of their chief warrior rendered impotent «™ By Jupiter. His hand is plainly seen Among the sons of men ; to some he gives Glory above the rest ; from some he takes The glory, and withdraws from their defence. He withers now the courage of the Greeks, ,$ And succors us. Press closely round the fleet, And combat. Whosoe'er among you all, Wounded or beaten down, shall meet his death, So let him die; 't is no inglorious fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To perish fighting in his country's cause; «v, And he shall leave his wife and children safe, His home and household store inviolate, If now the Greeks depart to their own land." With words like these he filled their hearts anew With strength and courage. On the other side «3s Ajax exhorted thus his warrior friends : — * Shame on you, Greeks! We perish here, unless We rescue with strong arms our host and fleet. Think ye that, should the crested Hector seize Our galleys, ye may reach your homes on foot? ,*, Hear ye not Hector's voice, who, fiercely bent To burn our ships with fire, is cheering on His warriors? To no dance he summons them, But to the battle. Nought is left for us, And other counsel there is none, save this: «« Close with the foe; let every hand put forth Its strength; far better't were to die at once, Or make at once our safety sure, than thus To waste away, in lingering fight, beside Our ships, destroyed by weaker arms than ours." ss0 So spake the chief, and all who heard received Courage and strength. Then Hector put to death Schedius, the son of Perimedes, prince Of the Phocaians. Ajax also slew Laodamas, Antenor's honored son, «ss A chief of infantry. Polydamas Struck down Cyllenian Otus, who had come, The comrade of Phylides, at the head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the high-souled Epeians. Meges saw, And rushed upon Polydamas, who sprang aso Aside unharmed, for Phoebus suffered not The son of Panthoiis thus to be o'erthrown, Fighting among the foremost. But the spear Of Meges wounded Croesmus in the breast; He fell with clanging arms. The slayer stripped «s The corpse; but Dolops, son of Lampus, skilled To wield the spear, leaped on him in the act. Lampus, the father, best of men, was son Of king Laomedon, and eminent For warlike prowess. Dolops struck the shield «7» Of Meges in the midst; the corselet stayed The blade with its close jointed plates, and saved The warrior's life. That corselet Phyleus brought From Ephyre, beside the Selleis, Given by his host, Euphetes, king of men, «n For his defence in battle, and it now Preserved his son from death. Then Meges smote With his sharp spear the helm that Dolops wore, And from its summit struck the horse-hair crest, New-tinged with purple, and the cone entire «, Fell midst the dust. While Meges, standing firm, Fought thus, and hoped the victory, to his aid Came warlike Menelaus, unobserved, And, standing near, smote Dolops from behind, Beneath the shoulder, and drave through the spear Till it appeared beyond. The Trojan fell «* Upon his face, and both the Greeks rushed on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wrench the brazen armor from his limbs, When Hector saw his fall and called aloud Upon the kindred of the slain. He first «*, Rebuked the valiant Melanippus, son Of Hicetaon, who but lately fed His slow-paced beeves at Percote, while yet The enemy was far from Troy ; but when The Achaians landed from their well-oared barks, ,*s He came to Troy, and took an eminent place Among the Trojans. Near to Priam's halls He had his dwelling, honored equally With Priam's sons. Him Hector thus rebuked :— "Why, Melanippus, are we loitering thus? 7,» Grievest thou not to see thy kinsman slain? And see'st thou not how eagerly the Greeks Are spoiling Dolops of his arms? Come on With me. No time is this for distant fight, But either we must rout the Greeks, or they 70s Will level to the ground the lofty towers Of Ilium, and will slay its citizens." He spake, and led the way ; his godlike friend Followed him, while the son of Telamon, Ajax, exhorted thus the sons of Greece :— 710 "Be men, my friends, and let a noble dread Of shame possess your hearts, and jealously Look to each other's honor in the heat Of battle; for to men who flee there comes No glory, and that way no safety lies." 715 He spake, and all were eager to drive back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The assaulting foe; they heeded well his words, And drew around their barks a fence of mail, While Jove urged on the Trojans. Then it was That Menelaus, brave in battle, spake 7» To rouse the courage of Antilochus :— "Antilochus, there is no other Greek Younger than thou, or fleeter; none so strong For combat. Would that, springing on the foe, Thou mightest strike some Trojan warrior down." 7n So speaking, he drew back; but he had roused The courage of his friend, who, springing forth From midst the foremost combatants, took aim, First looking keenly round, with his bright spear, From which the Trojans shrank as they beheld 73» The hero cast it. Not in vain he threw The weapon, for it struck upon the breast Brave Melanippus, Hicetaon's son; Beneath the pap it smote him as he came. He fell with ringing arms; Antilochus 71s Sprang toward him like a hound that springs to seize A wounded fawn, which, leaping from its lair, Is stretched disabled by the hunter's dart. So sprang the stout Antilochus on thee, O Melanippus ! —sprang to spoil thy limbs im Of armor; but the noble Hector saw, And, hastening through the thick of battle, came Against him. Mighty as he was in war, Yet ventured not Antilochus to wait His coming; but as flees a savage beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conscious of guilty deed, when, having slain Herdsman or hound, that kept the pastured kine, He steals away before a crowd of men, So fled the son of Nestor. On his rear The Trojans under Hector poured a storm 7s0 Of weapons, and the din was terrible. Yet when he reached the serried ranks of Greece He turned and stood. Meanwhile the Trojan host, Like ravening lions, fiercely rushed against The. galleys, that the will of Jupiter 7ss Might be fulfilled ; for now he nerved their limbs With vigor ever new, while he denied Stout hearts and victory to the Greeks, and rheered Their foes with hope. His purpose was to give The victory to Hector, Priam's son, tsm Till he should cast upon the beaked ships The fierce, devouring fire, and bring to pass The end for which the cruel Thetis prayed. Therefore did Jove the All-disposer wait Till from a burning galley he should see 7«s The flames arise. Then must the Trojan host, — Such was his will,— retreating from the fleet, Yield to the Greeks the glory of the day. For this he moved the already eager heart Of Hector, son of Priam, to attack tv, The roomy ships. The hero was aroused To fury fierce as Mars when brandishing His spear, or as a desolating flame That rages on a mountain-side among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thickets of a close-grown wood. His lips 77s Were white with foam; his eyes from underneath His frowning brows streamed fire ; and as he fought, Upon the hero's temples fearfully The helmet nodded. Jupiter himself Sent aid from his high seat, and heaped on him 7*, Honor and fame beyond the other chiefs, — And they were many, —for his term of life Was to be short. Minerva even now Was planning to bring on its closing day, Made fatal by the might of Peleus' son. 7«s And now he strove to break the Grecian ranks, Assaulting where he saw the thickest crowd And the best weapons ; yet in vain he strove With all his valor. Through the serried lines He could not break ; the Greeks in solid squares 790 Resisted, like a rock that huge and high By the gray deep abides the buffetings Of the shrill winds and swollen waves that beat Against it. Firmly thus the Greeks withstood The Trojan host, and fled not. In a blaze 79s Of armor, Hector, rushing toward their ranks, Fell on them like a mighty billow raised By the strong cloud-born winds, that flings itself On a swift ship, and whelms it in its spray, While fearfully among the cordage howls s*, The blast; the sailors trcmble and are faint With fear, as men who deem their death-hour nigh. So the Greek warriors were dismayed at heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when a hungry lion suddenly Springs on a herd of kine that crop the grass *,s By hundreds in the broad moist meadow-grounds, Beneath the eye of one who never learned To guard his horned charge from beasts of prey, But ever walks before them or behind, While the grim spoiler bounds into the midst e-0 And makes a prey of one, and all the rest Are scattered in affright, so all the Greeks Were scattered by the will of heaven before Hector and Father Jove. Yet only one, Young Periphoetes of Mycenae, fell, s.« The son of Copreus. Once his father went An envoy from Eurystheus to the court Of mighty Hercules. The son excelled The father in all gifts of form and mind, In speed, in war, in council eminent Among the noblest of his land. His death Brought Hector new renown ; for as he turned, Stepping by chance upon his buckler's rim, That reached the ground, — the buckler which had been His fence against the enemy's darts, — he fell m Backward, his helmet clashing fearfully Around his temples. Hector saw, and came In haste, and pierced his bosom with his spear, Among his fellow-warriors, who with grief Beheld, yet dared not aid him, such their awe «30 Of noble Hector. Now the Greeks retired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among that row of galleys which were first Drawn up the beach; the foe poured after them, In hot pursuit; again the Greeks fell back, Constrained, and left that foremost row behind, *a And stood beside their tents in close array, And not dispersed throughout the camp, for shame And fear restrained them, and unceasingly With shouts they bade each other bravely stand. Chiefly Gerenian Nestor, wise to guide s« The counsels of the Greeks, adjured them all, And in their parents' name, to keep their ground. "O friends, be men ; so act that none may feel Ashamed to meet the eyes of other men. Think each one of his children and his wife, «« His home, his parents, living yet or dead. For them, the absent ones, I supplicate, And bid you rally here, and scorn to fly." He spake, and his brave words to every heart Carried new strength and courage. Pallas then «s» Lifted the heaven-sent cloud that veiled the fight, And all things in the clear full light were seen On either side, both where the galleys lay And where the warriors struggled. They beheld Hector the great in war, and all his host, ess Both those who formed the rear and wielded not Their arms, and those who combated in front Beside the ships. And now it pleased no more The soul of valiant Ajax to remain In the thick squadrons with the other Greeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, striding on the galley-decks, he bore A sea-pike two and twenty cubits long, Huge, and beset with iron nails. As when One who is skilled to vault on running steeds Chooses four horses from a numerous herd, a* And on the highway to a populous town Drives them, while men and women in a crowd Behold his feats with wonder, as he leaps Boldly, without a fall, from steed to steed, And back again, and all the while they run, e7o So on the lofty decks of those good ships From ship to ship flew Ajax, lifting up His mighty voice, — a shout that reached to heaven, — And bade the Greeks defend their fleet and tents. Nor loitered Hector in those armed throngs «w Of Troy, but as a tawny eagle swoops Upon a flock of birds that seek their food Along a river's border, — geese or cranes, Or long-necked swans, — so Hector in hot haste Sprang toward a galley with an azure prow, aso While mightily the power of Jove impelled The hero onward, and inflamed his train With courage. Fiercely then around the ships The struggle was renewed. Thou wouldst have said No toils of war could tire those resolute arms, s»s So stubbornly they fought. In every mind The thought was this: the Greeks were in despair Of rescue, and believed their hour had come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To perish; every Trojan hoped to give The fleet to flames, and slay the sons of Greece. *» With thoughts like these the hostile warriors closed. Then Hector laid his hand upon the stern Of a stanch galley, beautiful and swift, In which l'rotesilaiis came to Troy,— It never bore him back. Around its keel sss The Trojans and the Greeks fought hand to hand, And slew each other. For no more they sent The arrow or the javelin from afar, Waiting to see the wound it gave, but each With equal fury pressed upon his foe *» With halberd and with trenchant battle-axe, Huge sword and two-edged spear. Upon the ground Had fallen many a fair black-hilted sword With solid handles, some from slain men's hands, Some from lopped arms of warriors; the dark earth Ran red with blood. But Hector, having laid 90« His hand upon the galley's stern, held fast To the carved point, and called upon his men :— "Bring fire, and press in throngs upon the foe; For now doth Jove vouchsafe to us a day »10 Worth" all the past, — a day on which we make The ships our prey. Against the will of Heaven They landed on our coast, and brought on us Disas'ers many, through the coward fears Of our own elders, who denied my wish 91s To combat at the galleys, and held back The people. But if then the Thunderer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darkened our minds, his spirit moves us now In what we do, and we obey his will.-' He spake ; and they with fiercer valor fell sn0 Upon the Greeks. Even Ajax could no more Withstand the charge, but, fearing to be slain, Amid a storm of darts withdrew a space, To where the seven-foot bench of rowers lay, And left the galley's stern. There, as he stood, He watched the assailants keenly, and beat back With thrusts of his long spear whoever brought The firebrand. With terrific shouts he called Upon the Greeks to combat manfully:— "O friends, Achaian heroes, ministers 0» Of Mars, be men, be mindful of your fame For valor. Do ye dream that in your rear Are succors waiting us, or firmer walls That may protect us yet? Nay, no fenced town im Have we for refuge, flanked with towers from which Fresh troops may take our place. Between the sea And country of the well-armed Trojans lie Our tents ; our native land is far away; And now our only hope of safety left Is in our weapons: there is no retreat." wo He spake, and mightily with his sharp spear Thrust at whoever of the men of Troy At Hector's bidding came with fire to burn The galleys. On the blade of that long spear The hero took them as they came, and slew ws In close encounter twelve before the fleet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
