<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 22</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"/>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-22" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>THUS were they driven within the city walls Like frighted fawns, and there dispersing cooled Their sweaty limbs, and quenched their eager thirst, And rested on the battlements. The Greeks, Bearing their shields upon their shoulders, came s Close to the ramparts. Hector's adverse fate Detained him still without the walls of Troy, And near the Scaean gates. Meantime the god Apollo to the son of Peleus said :— "O son of Peleus! why pursue me thus » With thy swift feet, — a mortal man in chase Page 259 Book XXII. 259 Of an immortal? That I am a god Thou seest not yet, but turnest all thy rage On me, and, having put the host of Troy To rout, dost think of them no more. They find ,s A refuge in their town, while far astray Thou wanderest hither. Thou hast not the power To slay me; I am not of mortal birth." The swift Achilles angrily replied: "O archer-god, thou most unjust of all » The immortals! thou hast wronged me, luring me Aside; since many a warrior I had forced To bite the dust before they reached the gates Of Ilium but for thee, who from my grasp Hast snatched the glory and hast rescued them. »s Thou didst not fear my vengeance; yet if power Were given me, I would punish thee for this." He spake, and with heroic purpose turned Toward Ilium. As a steed that wins the race Flies at his utmost speed across the plain, y And whirls along the chariot, with such speed The son of Peleus moved his rapid feet. The aged monarch Priam was the first To see him as he scoured the plain, and shone Like to the star which in the autumn time « Rises and glows among the lights of heaven With eminent lustre at the dead of night, — Orion's Hound they call it, — bright indeed, And yet of baleful omen, for it brings Distressing heat to miserable men. *, Page 260 2(5o The Iliad. So shone the brass upon the warrior's breast As on he flew. The aged Priam groaned, And smote his head with lifted hands, and called Aloud, imploring his beloved son, Who eagerly before the city gate Waited his foe Achilles. Priam thus, With outstretched hands, besought him piteously :- "O wait not, Hector, my beloved son, To combat with Pelides, thus alone And far from succor, lest thou meet thy death, Slain by his hand, for he is mightier far Than thou art. \Yrould that he, the cruel one, Were but as much the favorite of the gods As he is mine! then should the birds of prey And dogs devour his carcass, and the grief That weighs upon my spirit would depart. I have been robbed by him of many sons, — Brave youths, whom he has slain or sold as slaves In distant isles; and now I see no more Among our host on whom the gates are closed My Polydorus and Lycaon, whom The peerless dame Laothoe bore to me. If yet they are within the Grecian camp, I will redeem their lives with brass and gold; For I have store, which Altes, the renowned And aged, gave his daughter. If they live No longer, but have passed to the abode Of Hades, bitter will our sorrow be, — Mine and their mother's, — but the popular grief Page 261 Book XXII. 26 r Will sooner be consoled if thou fall not, 70 Slain by Achilles. Come within the walls, My son, that thou mayst still be the defence Of Ilium's sons and daughters, nor increase The glory of Pelides with the loss Of th ine own life. Have pity upon me, 7s Who only live to suffer, — whom the son Of Saturn, on the threshold of my age, Hath destined to endure a thousand griefs, And then to be destroyed, — to see my sons Slain by the sword, my daughters dragged away «o Into captivity, their chambers made A spoil, our infants dashed against the ground By cruel hands, the consorts of my sons Borne off by the ferocious Greeks; and last, Perchance the very dogs which I have fed «s Here in my palaces and at my board, The guardians of my doors, when, by the spear Or sword, some enemy shall take my life, And at my threshold leave me stretched a corpse, Will rend me, and, with savage greediness, 50 Will lap my blood, and in the porch lie down. When one in prime of youth lies slain in war, Gashed with the spear, his wounds become him well, And honor him in all men's eyes; but when An aged man is slain, and his white head m And his white beard and limbs are foully torn By ravening dogs, there is no sadder sight." So the old monarch spake, and with his hands Page 262 262 The Iliad. Tore his gray hair, but moved not Hector thus. Then came, with lamentations and in tears, i-» The warrior's mother forward. One hand laid Her bosom bare; she pressed the other hand Beneath it, sobbed, and spake these winged words:— "Revere this bosom, Hector, and on me Have pity. If when thou wert but a babe 1..s I ever on this bosom stilled thy cries, Think of it now, beloved child; avoid That dreadful chief; withdraw within the walls, Nor madly think to encounter him alone, Son of my love and of my womb! If he «0 Should slay thee, I shall not lament thy death Above thy bier, — I, nor thy noble wife, — But far from us„the greedy dogs will throng To mangle thee beside the Grecian fleet." Thus, weeping bitterly, the aged pair n$ Entreated their dear son, yet moved him not. He stood and waited for his mighty foe Achilles, as a serpent at his den, Fed on the poisons of the wild, awaits The traveller, and, fierce with hate of man, i~ And glaring fearfully, lies coiled within. So waited Hector with a resolute heart, And kept his ground, and, leaning his bright shield Against a tower that jutted from the walls, Conferred with his great soul impatiently : — ns "Ah me! if I should pass within the walls, Then will Polydamas be first to cast Page 263 Book XXII. 263 Reproach upon me; for he counselled me To lead the Trojans back into the town That fatal night which saw Achilles rise ,*, To join the war again. I yielded not To his advice; far better if I had. Now, since my fatal stubbornness has brought This ruin on my people, I most dread The censure of the men and long-robed dames ns Of Ilium. Men less brave than I will say, 'Foolhardy Hector in his pride has thrown His people's lives away.' So will they speak, And better were it for me to return, Achilles slain, or, slain myself by him, ,*, To perish for my country gloriously. But should I lay aside this bossy shield And this stout helm, and lean against the wall This spear, and go to meet the gallant son Of Peleus, with a promise to restore us Helen and all the treasure brought with her To Troy by Paris, in his roomy ships, — All that the war was waged for, — that the sons Of Atreus may convey it hence, besides Wealth drawn from all the hoards within the town, And to be shared among the Greeks; for I i« Would bind the Trojans by a solemn oath To keep brick nothing, but divide the whole- AVhate'er of riches this fair town contains — Into two parts— But why should I waste thought On plans like these? I must not act the part ,f,. Page 264 264 The Iliad. Of suppliant to a man who may not show Regard or mercy, but may hew me down Defenceless, with my armor laid aside As if I were a woman. Not with him *» May I hold parley from a tree or rock, As youths and maidens with each other hold Light converse. Better't were to rush at once To combat, and the sooner learn to whom Olympian Jove decrees the victory." i«s Such were his thoughts. Achilles now drew near. Like crested Mars, the warrior-god, he came. On his right shoulder quivered fearfully The Pelian ash, and from his burnished mail There streamed a light as of a blazing fire, 170 Or of the rising sun. When Hector saw, He trembled, nor could venture to remain, But left the gates and fled away in fear. Pelides, trusting to his rapid feet, Pursued him. As, among the mountain wilds, ,re A falcon, fleetest of the birds of air, Darts toward a timid dove that wheels away To shun him by a sidelong flight, while he Springs after her again and yet again, And screaming follows, certain of his prey, — ,*, Thus onward flew Achilles, while as fast Fled Hector in dismay, with hurrying feet, Beside the wall. They passed the Mount of View, And the wind-beaten fig-tree, and they ran Along the public way by which the wall '«s Page 265 Book XXII. 265 Was skirted, till they came where from the ground The two fair springs of eddying Xanthus rise,— One pouring a warm stream from which ascends And spreads a vapor like a smoke from fire; The other, even in summer, sending forth 1*, A current cold as hail, or snow, or ice. And there were broad stone basins, fairly wrought, At which, in time of peace, before the Greeks Had landed on the plain, the Trojan dames And their fair daughters washed their sumptuous robes. ,« Past these they swept; one fled, and one pursued, — A brave man fled, a braver followed close, And swiftly both. Not for a common prize, A victim from the herd, a bullock's hide, Such as reward the fleet of foot, they ran, — *» The race was for the knightly Hector's life. As firm-paced coursers, that are wont to win, Fly toward the goal, when some magnificent prize, A tripod or a damsel, is proposed In honor of some hero's obsequies, ~s So these flew thrice on rapid feet around The city of Priam. All the gods of heaven Looked on, and thus the Almighty Father spake : — "Alas! I see a hero dear to me Pursued around the wall. My heart is grieved ™ For Hector, who has brought so many thighs Of bullocks to my altar on the side Of Ida ploughed with glens, or on the heights VOL. 11. 12 Page 266 266 The Iliad. Of Ilium. The renowned Achilles now Is chasing him with rapid feet around «s The city of Priam. Now bethink yourselves, And answer. Shall we rescue him from death? Or shall we doom him, valiant as he is, To perish by the hand of Peleus' son?" Minerva, blue-eyed goddess, answered thus: »» "O Father, who dost hurl the thunderbolt, And hide the sky in clouds, what hast thou said? Wouldst thou reprieve from death a mortal man, Whose doom is fixed? Then do it; but know this, That all the other gods will not approve." »s Then spake again the Cloud-compeller Jove: "Tritonia, my dear child, be calm. I spake Of no design. I would be kind to thee. Do as thou wilt, and be there no delay." He spake; and Pallas from the Olympian peaks, Encouraged by his words in what her thought n, Had planned already, downward shot to earth. Still, with quick steps, the fleet Achilles pressed On Hector's flight. As when a hound has roused A fawn from its retreat among the hills, ns And chases it through glen and forest ground. And to close thickets, where it skulks in fear Until he overtake it, Hector thus Sought vainly to elude the fleet pursuit Of Peleus' son. As often as he thought, »«0 By springing toward the gates of Troy, to gain Aid from the weapons of his friends who stood Page 267 Book XXII. 267 On the tall towers, so often was the Greek Before him, forcing him to turn away From Ilium toward the plain. Achilles thus mi Kept nearest to the city. As in dreams The fleet pursuer cannot overtake, Nor the pursued escape, so was it now; One followed but in vain, the other fled As fruitlessly. But how could Hector thus »s» Have put aside the imminent doom of death, Had not Apollo met him once again, For the last time, and given him strength and speed? The great Achilles nodded to his host A sign that no man should presume to strike «a At Hector with his weapon, lest perchance Another, wounding him, should bear away The glory, and Pelides only wear The second honors. When the twain had come For the fourth time beside Scamander's springs, *» The All-Father raised the golden balance high, And, placing in the scales two lots which bring Death's long dark sleep, — one lot for Peleus' son, And one for knightly Hector, — by the midst He poised the balance. Hector's fate sank down *s To Hades, and Apollo left the field. The blue-eyed goddess Pallas then approached The son of Peleus with these winged words : — "Renowned Achilles, dear to Jupiter! Now may we, as I hope, at last return w To the Achaian army and the fleet Page 268 268 T/ie IlUid. With glory, Hector slain, the terrible In war. Escape he cannot, even though The archer-god Apollo fling himself With passionate entreaty at the feet Of Jove the ^igis-bearer. Stay thou here And breathe a moment, while I go to him And lure him hither to encounter thee." She spake, and he obeyed, and gladly stood Propped on the ashen stem of his keen spear; While, passing on, Minerva overtook The noble Hector. In the outward form, And with the strong voice of Deiphobus, She stood by him and spake these winged words: "Hard pressed I find thee, brother, by the swift Achilles, who, with feet that never rest, Pursues thee round the walls of Priam's town. But let us make a stand and beat him back." And then the crested Hector spake in turn: "Deiphobus, thou ever hast been dear To me beyond my other brethren, sons Of Hecuba and Priam. Now still more I honor thee, since thou hast seen my plight, And for my sake hast ventured forth without The gates, while all the rest remain within." And then the blue-eyed Pallas spake again: "Brother! 't is true, my father, and the queen, My mother, and my comrades, clasped my knees In turn, and earnestly entreated me That I would not go forth, such fear had fallen Page 269 Book XXII. 269 On all of them; but I was grieved for thee. Now let us combat valiantly, nor spare The weapons that we bear, and we shall learn Whether Achilles, having slain us both, Will carry to the fleet our bloody spoil, 30s Or die himself, the victim of thy spear." The treacherous goddess spake, and led the way; And when the advancing chiefs stood face to face, The crested hero, Hector, thus began : — "No longer I avoid thee as of late, v O son of Peleus! Thrice around the walls Of Priam's mighty city have I fled, Nor dared to wait thy coming. Now my heart Bids me encounter thee; my time is ceme To slay or to be slain. Now let us call sis The gods to witness, who attest and guard The covenants of men. Should Jove bestow On me the victory, and I take thy life, Thou shalt meet no dishonor at my hands; But, stripping off the armor, I will send p» The Greeks thy body. Do the like by me." The swift Achilles answered with a frown: "Accursed Hector, never talk to me Of covenants. Men and lions plight no faith, Nor wolves agree with lambs, but each must plan v$ Evil against the other. So between Thyself and me no compact can exist, Or understood intent. First, one of us Must fall and yield his life-blood to the god Page 270 270 The Iliad. Of battles. Summon all thy valor now. 330 A skilful spearman thou hast need to be, And a bold warrior. There is no escape, For now doth Pallas doom thee to be slain By my good spear. Thou shalt repay to me The evil thou hast done my countrymen, — 3^ My friends whom thou hast slaughtered in thy rage." He spake, and, brandishing his massive spear, Hurled it at Hector, who beheld its aim From where he stood. He stooped, and over him The brazen weapon passed, and plunged to earth, wo U nseen by royal Hector, Pallas went And plucked it from the ground, and brought it back And gave it to the hands of Peleus' son, While Hector said to his illustrious foe :— "Godlike Achilles, thou hast missed thy mark; 3« Nor hast thou learned my doom from Jupiter, As thou pretendest. Thou art glib of tongue. And cunningly thou orderest thy speech, In hope that I who hear thee may forget My might and valor. Think not I shall flee, 3s0 That thou mayst pierce my back; for thou shalt send Thy spear, if God permit thee, through my breast As I rush on thee. Now avoid in turn My brazen weapon. Would that it might pass Clean through thee, all its length! The tasks of war For us of Troy were lighter for thy death, 3s« Thou pest and deadly foe of all our race!" He spake, and brandishing his massive spear, Page 271 Book XXII. 271 Hurled it, nor missed, but in the centre smote The buckler of Pelides. Far away *s0 It bounded from the brass, and he was vexed To see that the swift weapon from his hand Had flown in vain. He stood perplexed and sad; No second spear had he. He called aloud On the white-bucklered chief, Deiphobus, *s To bring another; but that chief was far, And Hector saw that it was so, and said :— "Ah me! the gods have summoned me to die. I thought my warrior-friend, Deiphobus, Was by my side; but he is still in Troy, w, And Pallas has deceived me. Now my death Cannot be far, — is near; there is no hope Of my escape, for so it pleases Jove And Jove's great archer-son, who have till now Delivered me. My hour at last is come; 37s Yet not ingloriously or passively I die, but first will do some valiant deed, Of which mankind shall hear in after time.'" He spake, and drew the keen-edged sword that hung, Massive and finely tempered, at his side, ?*, And sprang — as when an eagle high in heaven, Through the thick cloud, darts downward to the plain To clutch some tender lamb or timid hare, So Hector, brandishing that keen-edged sword, Sprang forward, while Achilles opposite » Page 272 272 The Iliad. Leaped toward him, all on fire with savage hate, And holding his bright buckler, nobly wrought, Before him. On his shining helmet waved The fourfold crest; there tossed the golden tufts With which the hand of Vulcan lavishly Had decked it. As in the still hours of night Hesper goes forth among the host of stars, The fairest light of heaven, so brightly shone, Brandished in the right hand of Peleus' son, The spear's keen blade, as, confident to slay The noble Hector, o'er his glorious form His quick eye ran, exploring where to plant The surest wound. The glittering mail of brass Won from the slain Patroclus guarded well Each part, save only where the collar-bones Divide the shoulder from the neck, and there Appeared the throat, the spot where life is most In peril. Through that part the noble son Of Peleus drave his spear; it went quite through The tender neck, and yet the brazen blade Cleft not the windpipe, and the power to speak Remained. The Trojan fell amid the dust, And thus Achilles boasted o'er his fall: — "Hector, when from the slain Patroclus thou Didst strip his armor, little didst thou think Of danger. Thou hadst then no fear of me, Who was not near thee to avenge his death. Fool! there was left within the roomy ships A mightier one than he, who should come forth, Page 273 Book XXII. 273 The avenger of his blood, to take thy life. 41s Foul dogs and birds of prey shall tear thy flesh; The Greeks shall honor him with funeral rites." And then the crested Hector faintly said: "I pray thee by thy life, and by thy knees, And by thy parents, suffer not the dogs 4*, To tear me at the galleys of the Greeks. Accept abundant store of brass and gold, Which gladly will my father and the queen, My mother, give in ransom. Send to them My body, that the warriors and the dames *&gt;s Of Troy may light for me the funeral pile." The swift Achilles answered with a frown: "Nay, by my knees entreat me not, thou cur, Nor by my parents. I could even wish My fury prompted me to cut thy flesh 4*, In fragments, and devour it, such the wrong That I have had from thee. There will be none To drive away the dogs about thy head, Not though thy Trojan friends should bring to me Tenfold and twenty-fold the offered gifts, 41s And promise others, — not though Priam, sprung From Dardanus, should send thy weight in gold. Thy mother shall not lay thee on thy bier, To sorrow over thee whom she brought forth; But dogs and birds of prey shall mangle thee." 4*, And then the crested Hector, dying, said: "I know thee, and too clearly I foresaw I should not move thee, for thou hast a heart 12 • R Page 274 274 The Iliad. Of iron. Yet reflect that for my sake The anger of the gods may fall on thee, «s When Paris and Apollo strike thee down, Strong as thou art, before the Scsean gates." Thus Hector spake, and straightway o'er him closed The night of death; the soul forsook his limbs, And flew to Hades, grieving for its fate, — 4se So soon divorced from youth and youthful might. Then said the great Achilles to the dead:— "Die thou; and I, whenever it shall please Jove and the other gods, will meet my fate." He spake, and, plucking forth his brazen lance, «ss He laid it by, and from the body stripped The bloody mail. The thronging Greeks beheld With wonder Hector's tall and stately form, And no one came who did not add a wound; And, looking to each other, thus they said :— *v, "How much more tamely Hector now endures Our touch than when he set the fleet on fire!" Such were the words of those who smote the dead; But now, when swift Achilles from the corpse Had stripped the armor, he stood forth among «s The Achaian host, and spake these winged words:— "Leaders and princes of the Grecian host! Since we, my friends, by favor of the gods, Have overcome the chief who wrought more harm To us than all the rest, let us assault 47• The town, and learn what they of Troy intend, — Page 275 Book XXII. 27$ Whether their troops will leave the citadel Since he is slain, or hold it with strong hand, Though Hector is no more. But why give thought To plans like these while yet Patroclus lies m A corse unwept, unburied, at the fleet? I never will forget him while I live And while these limbs have motion. Though below In Hades they forget the dead, yet I Will there remember my beloved friend. «so Now then, ye youths of Greece, move on and chant A paean, while, returning to the fleet, We bring great glory with us; we have slain The noble Hector, whom, throughout their town, The Trojans ever worshipped like a god." *s He spake, and, plannmg in his mind to treat The noble Hector shamefully, he bored The sinews of his feet between the heel And ankle; drawing through them leathern thongs He bound them to the car, but left the head «0 To trail in dust. And then he climbed the car, Took in the shining mail, and lashed to speed The coursers. Not unwillingly they flew. Around the dead, as he was dragged along, The dust arose; his dark locks swept the ground ** That head, of late so noble in men's eyes, Lay deep amid the dust, for Jove that day Suffered the foes of Hector to insult His corse in his own land. His mother saw, And tore her hair, and flung her lustrous veil s* Page 276 276 The Iliad. Away, and uttered piercing shrieks. No less His father, who so loved him, piteously Bewailed him; and in all the streets of Troy The people wept aloud, with such lament As if the towery Ilium were in flames s0s Even to its loftiest roofs. They scarce could keep The aged king within, who, wild with grief, Struggled to rush through the Dardanian gates, And, rolling in the dust, entreated all Who stood around him, calling them by name : — yo "Refrain, my friends, though kind be your intent. Let me go forth alone, and at the fleet Of Greece will I entreat this man of blood And violence. He may perchance be moved With reverence for my age, and pity me s,s In my gray hairs; for such a one as I Is Peleus, his own father, by whose care This Greek was reared to be a scourge to Troy, And, more than all, a cause of grief to me, So many sons of mine in life's fresh prime s*, Have fallen by his hand. I mourn for them, But not with such keen anguish as I mourn For Hector. Sorrow for his death will bring My soul to Hades. Would that he had died Here in my arms! this solace had been ours, — s»s His most unhappy mother and myself Had stooped to shed these tears upon his bier." He spake, and wept, and all the citizens Wept with him. Hecuba among the dames Page 277 Book XXII. 277 Took up the lamentation, and began : — s*, "Why do I live, my son, when thou art dead, And I so wretched ? — thou who wert my boast Ever, by night and day, where'er I went, And whom the Trojan men and matrons called Their bulwark, honoring thee as if thou wert s» A god. They gtory in thy might no more, Since Fate and Death have overtaken thee." Weeping she spake. Meantime Andromache Had heard no tidings of her husband yet. No messenger had even come to say s4» That he was still without the gates. She sat In a recess of those magnificent halls, And wove a twofold web of brilliant hues, On which were scattered flowers of rare device; And she had given her bright-haired maidens charge To place an ample caldron on the fire, an That Hector, coming from the battle-field, Might find the warm bath ready. Thoughtless one! She knew not that the blue-eyed archer-queen, Far from the bath prepared for him, had slain ss0 Her husband by the hand of Peleus' son. She heard the shrieks, the wail upon the tower, Trembled in every limb, and quickly dropped The shuttle, saying to her bright-haired maids : — "Come with me, two of you, that I may learn s« What now has happened. 'T is my mother's voice That I have heard. My heart leaps to my mouth; My limbs fail under me. Some deadly harm Page 278 2/8 The Iliad. Hangs over Priam's sons; far be the hour When I shall hear of it. And yet I fear s*» Lest that Achilles, having got between .The daring Hector and the city gates, May drive him to the plain alone, and quell The desperate valor that was ever his; For never would he keep the ranks, but ranged s«s Beyond them, and gave way to no man's might." She spake, and from the royal mansion rushed Distractedly, and with a beating heart. Her maids went with her. When she reached the tower And throng of men, and, standing on the wall, s7° Looked forth, she saw her husband dragged away Before the city. Toward the Grecian fleet The swift steeds drew him. Sudden darkness came Over her eyes, and in a breathless swoon She sank away and fell. The ornaments 37s Dropped from her brow, — the wreath, the woven band, The net, the veil which golden Venus gave That day when crested Hector wedded her, Dowered with large gifts, and led her from her home, Eetion's palace. Round her in a throng s*, Her sisters of the house of Priam pressed, And gently raised her in that deathlike swoon. But when she breathed again, and to its seat The conscious mind returned, as in their arms She lay, with sobs and broken speech she said : — sss Page 279 Book XXII. 279 "Hector, — O wretched me ! — we both were born To sorrow; thou at Troy, in Priam's house, And I at Thebe in Eetion's halls, By woody Placos. From a little child He reared me there, — unhappy he, and I »0 Unhappy! O that I had ne'er been born! Thou goest down to Hades and the depths Of earth, and leavest me in thine abode, Widowed, and never to be comforted. Thy son, a speechless babe, to whom we two s95 Gave being, — hapless parents! — cannot have Thy loving guardianship now thou art dead, Nor be a joy to thee. Though he survive The cruel warfare which the sons of Greece Are waging, hard and evil yet will be 60. His lot hereafter; others will remove His landmarks and will make his fields their own. The day in which a boy is fatherless Makes him companionless; with, downcast eyes He wanders, and his cheeks are stained with tears. Unfed he goes where sit his father's friends, ** And plucks one by the cloak, and by the robe Another. One who pities him shall give A scanty draught, which only wets his lips, But not his palate; while another boy, «,0 Whose parents both are living, thrusts him thence With blows and vulgar clamor: 1 Get thee gone! Thy father is not with us at the feast.' Page 280 28o The Iliad. Then to his widowed mother shall return Astyanax in tears, who not long since «,i Was fed, while sitting in his father's lap, On marrow and the delicate fat of lambs. And ever when his childish sports had tired The boy, and sleep came stealing over him, He slumbered, softly cushioned, on a couch **, And in his nurse's arms, his heart at ease And satiate with delights. But now thy son Astyanax, — whom so the Trojans name Because thy valor guarded gate and tower, — Thy care withdrawn, shall suffer many things. ««s While far from those who gave thee birth, beside The roomy ships of Greece, the restless worms Shall make thy flesh their banquet when the dogs Have gorged themselves. Thy garments yet remain Within the palace, delicately wrought *s» And graceful, woven by the women's hands; And these, since thou shalt put them on no more, Nor wear them in thy death, I burn with fire Before the Trojan men and dames; and all Shall see how gloriously thou wert arrayed." *o Weeping she spake, and with her wept her maid..</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
