<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 21</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"/>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-21" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>OW when they reached the pleasant banks The eddying Xanthus runs, the river sprung From deathless Jove, Achilles drave his foes through which Page 232 232 The Iliad. Asunder. Part he chased across the plain Town ward, along the way by which the Greek; In terror fled the day before, pursued By glorious Hector. Panic-struck they ran Along that way, while, to restrain their flight, Before them Juno hung a veil of cloud And darkness. Meanwhile half the flying crowd •0 Leaped down to that deep stream and rolle! among Its silver eddies. With a mighty noise They plunged; the torrent dashed; the banks around Remurmured shrilly to the cries of those Who floated struggling in the current's whirl, ,s As when before the fierce, devouring flames A swarm of locusts, springing into air, Fly toward a river, while the fire behind Crackles with sudden fierceness, and in fright They fall into the waves, the roaring stream «, Of the deep-eddied Xanthus thus was filled Before Achilles with a mingled crowd Of steeds and men. The Jove-descended man Left leaning on the tamarisks his spear Upon the river's border, and leaped in, as Armed only with his sword, intent to deal Death on the fugitives; on every side He smote, and from the smitten by the sword Rose lamentable cries; the waves around Grew crimson with their blood. As when before », A dolphin of huge bulk the fishes flee Page 233 Book XXL 233 In fear, and crowd the creeks that lie around The sheltered haven, — for their foe devours All that he overtakes, — the Trojans thus Hid from his sight among the hollow rocks 3s Beside the rushing river. When his hand Was weary with the work of death, he took Twelve youths alive, whose blood was yet to pay The penalty for Menoetiades, His slaughtered friend. He led them from the stream, *, Passive with fear like fawns, and tied their hands Behind them with the well-twined cords that bound Their tunics. Then he gave them to his friends, Who led the captives to the roomy ships. Again Achilles rushed upon the foe 4s Intent on slaughter. One he met who climbed The river's bank, Dardanian Priam's son, Lycaon, whom in former days he made His captive, by surprise, when in the night He found him lopping with an axe the boughs s0 Of a wild fig-tree, that the trunk might form The circle of a wheel. Achilles came, An unexpected foe, and bore him off To sea, and sold him in the populous isle Of Lemnos. He was bought by Jason's son, ss The Imbrian prince, Eetion, who had been His host, and now redeemed him with large gifts, And sent him to Arisba's noble town. Yet thence he stole, and reached his father's house Page 234 234 The Iliad. Again, and there made merry with his friends a» Eleven days, but on the twelfth a god Delivered him again into the hands Of Peleus' son, who now would send his soul Repining down to Hades. When the chief, The swift of foot, beheld him stand unarmed, «s With neither helm nor shield nor spear, — for these He had thrown down, — faint with the sweaty toil Of clambering up the bank, and every limb Unstrung with weariness, then wrathfully Thus said Achilles to his mighty soul :— -« « O strange! my eyes behold a miracle. Sure, the brave sons of Troy whom I have slain Will rise up from the nether darkness yet, Since this man, whom I once reprieved from death And sold in Lemnos the divine, comes back. n Nor could the ocean's gray abyss of brine, Beyond which many long in vain to pass, Detajn him in that isle. But he shall taste The sharpness of my spear, that I may prove Whether he after that will reappear, », And whether the kind earth, which holds so well The valiant dead, can keep him in her womb." So pondered he and stood. The Trojan drew Close to him, with intent to clasp his knees, Fear-struck, yet hoping to avoid the doom »s Of bitler death. The great Achilles raised His ponderous spear to strike. Lycaon stooped, And, darting underneath the weapon, seized Page 235 Book XXI. 235 The hero's knees; behind him in the ground The spear stood fixed, though eager yet for blood ; ,* One arm was round his adversary's knees, The other held — and would not let it go — The spear, while thus with winged words he prayed : — "I clasp thy knees, Achilles; look on me Kindly and pity me, O foster-child 0s Of Jove. I am thy suppliant, and may claim Thy mercy. I partook with thee the fruits Of Ceres, when amid my fruitful fields Thou madest me a captive, carrying me From friends and kindred to the sacred isle «■ Of Lemnos. Thou didst sell me there, — my price A hundred beeves, — and thou shalt now receive, For ransom, thrice as many. It is yet But the twelfth morning since I came to Troy After much hardship, and a pitiless fate k,s Betrays me to thy hands. I must believe That Father Jove in wrath delivers me To thee again. Laothoe brought me forth To a brief life; that mother was the child Of aged Altes, — Altes ruling o'er no The warlike Leleges, by whom are tilled The heights of Pedasus, where Satnio flows, — And Priam wedded her with other maids. She bore two children to be slain by thee; One was the godlike Polydore, whom thou ns Didst smite with thy keen spear, in the front rank Page 236 236 The Iliad. Of those who fought on foot. His evil fate Must overtake me now, for, since a god Has brought me near thee, there is no escape. Yet let me tell thee this, and weigh it well, And let it save my life. I came not forth From the same womb with Hector, by whose hand Thy brave and gentle friend, Patroclus, died." The illustrious son of Priam endsd here His prayer, and heard a merciless reply:— i,s "Fool! never talk of ransom, — not a word. Before the evil day on which my friend Was slain, it pleased me oftentimes to spare The Trojans. Many a one I took alive And sold; but now no man of air their race, w Whom any god may bring within my reach, Shall leave the field alive, and least of all The sons of Priam. Die thou, then; and why Shouldst thou, my friend, lament? Patroclus died, And greatly he excelled thee. Seest thou not 13s How eminent in stature and in form Am I, whom to a prince renowned for worth A goddess mother bore; yet will there come To me a violent death at morn, at eve, Or at the midday hour, whenever he ,« Whose weapon is to take my life shall cast The spear or send an arrow from the string." He spake: the Trojan's heart and knees grew faint; His hand let go the spear; he sat and cowered Page 237 Book XXI. 237 With outstretched arms. Achilles-drew his sword, And smote his neck just at the collar-bone; 1# The two-edged blade was buried deep. He fell Prone on the earth; the black blood spouted forth And steeped the soil. Achilles by the foot Flung him to float among the river-waves, ,s0 And uttered, boastfully, these winged words: — "Lie there among the fishes, who shall feed Upon thy blood unscared. No mother there Shall weep thee lying on thy bier; thy corpse Scamander shall bear down to the broad sea, 1ss Where, as he sees thee darkening its face, Some fish shall hasten, darting through the waves, To feed upon Lycaon's fair white limbs. So perish ye, till sacred Troy be ours, You fleeing, while I follow close and slay. ,, This river cannot aid you, — this fair stream With silver eddies, to whose deity Ye offer many beeves in sacrifice, And fling into its gulfs your firm-paced steeds; But thus ye all shall perish, till I take «ss Full vengeance for Patroclus of the Greeks, Whom, while I stood aloof from war, ye slew." He spake: and, deeply moved with inward wrath, The River pondered how to render vain The prowess of Achilles, and avert •70 Destruction from the Trojans. Now the son Of Peleus rushed, his ponderous spear in hand, To slay Asteropasus, who was sprung Page 238 238 The Iliad. From Pelegon, and Pelegon was bom To the broad river Axius, of a maid, i7s The eldest-born of Acessamenus, Named Perilxra; for the river-god Was joined with her in love. Achilles sprang To meet the youth, as, rising from the stream, Armed with two spears, he stood, his heart made strong ,, And resolute by Xanthus, who had seen Indignantly so many Trojans die, — Youths whom Achilles slaughtered in his stream, And had no pity on them. When the twain Were near each other, standing face to face, *g The swift Achilles was the first to speak : — "Who and whence art thou that dost venture thus To meet me? They who seek to measure strength With me are sons of most unhappy men." And thus the illustrious son of Pelegon Made answer: "Brave Pelides, why inquire My lineage? I am from a distant coast, — Paeonia's fertile fields; I lead to war Paeonia's warriors with long spears, and this Is now the eleventh morning since I came us To join the war at Troy. I claim descent From Axius, the broad Axius, who pours forth The fairest river on the earth. His son Was Pelegon, expert to wield the spear, And I was born to Pelegon. And now, «» Illustrious son of Peleus, let us fight." Page 239 Book XXI. 239 He spake: Achilles raised the Pelian ash To smite; Asteropaeus aimed at him Both lances, for he used both hands alike. One struck the Grecian's shield, yet passed not through, Stopped by the god-given gold; the other gashed Lightly the elbow of his dexter arm; The black blood spouted forth, the spear passed on Beyond him, and, still eager for its prey, Stood fixed in earth. Achilles then, intent »10 To slay Asteropaeus, hurled at him His trusty spear. The weapon missed its mark, And, striking the high bank, was buried there Up to the middle of its ashen staff. Achilles drew the keen sword from his thigh, «$ And flew with fury toward his foe, who toiled In vain with sinewy arm to pluck that spear From out the bank; and thrice he shook the beam Fiercely, and thrice desisted, lacking strength, And last he sought, by bending it, to break The ashen weapon of tiacides. But ere it snapped Achilles took his life, Smiting him at the navel with the sword. Forth gushed the entrails to the ground, and o'er His dying eyes the darkness came; and then »s Achilles, leaping on his breast, tore off The armor, and exultingly exclaimed :— "Lie there! a perilous task it was for thee To combat with a son of Jove, though born Page 240 240 The Iliad. Thyself to a great River. I can boast »*» Descent from sovereign Jove. I owe mv birth To Peleus, ruler of the Myrmidons. His father was /Eacus, who was born To Jupiter, a god more potent far Than all the rivers flowing to the sea. «3s And mightier is the race of Jupiter Than that of any stream. Here close at hand Is a great river, if such aid can aught Avail thee; but to strive with Jupiter Is not permitted. Acheloiis, king «•*, Of rivers, cannot vie with him, nor yet The great and mighty deep from which proceed All streams and seas and founts and watery depths. He trembles at the bolt of mighty Jove . And his hoarse thunder crashing in the sky." us As thus he spake he plucked from out the bank His brazen spear, and left the lifeless chief Stretched in the sand, where the dark water steeped His limbs, and eels and fishes came and gnawed The warrior's reins. Achilles hastened on, »s» Pursuing the Pseonian knights, who now, When they beheld their bravest overthrown In desperate battle by the mighty arm And falchion of Pelides, took to flight Along the eddying river. There he slew »ss Mydon, Thersilochus, Astypylus, Mnesus, and Thrasius, and struck down in death ^inius and Ophelestes. Many more Page 241 Book XXL Of the Pseonians the swift-footed Greek Had slain, had not the eddying River, roused To anger, put a human semblance on, And uttered from its whirling deeps a voice :—- "O son of Peleus! thou who dost excel All other men in might and dreadful deeds,— For the gods aid thee ever, — if the son Of Saturn gives thee to destroy the race Of Trojans, drive them from me to the plain, And there perform thy terrible exploits. For now my pleasant waters, in their flow, Are choked with heaps of dead, and I no more Can pour them into the great deep, so thick The corpses clog my bed, while thou dost slay And sparest not. Now then, withhold thy hand, Prince of the people! I am horror-struck." Achilles the swift-footed made reply: "Be it as thou commandest, foster-child Of Jove, Scamander! Yet I shall not cease To slay these treaty-breakers till at length I shut them up within their town, and force Hector to meet me, that we may decide Which shall o'ercome the other, — he or I." He spake, and rushed upon the men of Troy, Terrible as a god, while from his bed The eddying River called to Phoebus thus : — "Why this, thou bearer of the silver bow, Thcu son of Jove? Thou heedest not the will Of Saturn's son, who strictly bade that thou VOL. 11. II p Page 242 242 The Iliad. Shouldst aid the Trojans till the latest gleam Of sunset, and till night is on the fields." And then Achilles, mighty with the spear, *&gt;, From the steep bank leaped into the mid-stream, While, foul with ooze, the angry River raised His waves, and pushed along the heaps of dead Slain by Achilles. These, with mighty roar As of a bellowing ox, Scamander cast »ss Aground; the living with his whirling gulfs He hid, and saved them in his friendly streams. In tumult terribly the surges rose Around Achilles, beating on his shield, And made his feet to stagger, till he grasped »» A tall, fair-growing elm upon the bank. Down came the tree, and in its loosened roots Brought the earth with it; the fair stream was checked By the thick branches, and the prostrate trunk Bridged it from side to side. Achilles sprang *,s From the deep pool, and fled with rapid feet Across the plain in terror. Nor did then The mighty river-god refrain, but rose Against him with a darker crest, to drive The noble son of Peleus from the field, 310 And so deliver Troy. Pelides sprang A spear's cast backward, — sprang with all the speed Of the black eagle's wing, the hunter-bird, Fleetest and strongest of the fowls of air. Like him he darted; clashing round his breast, s» Page 243 Book XXI. 243 The brazen mail rang fearfully. Askance He fled; the water with a mighty roar Followed him close. As, when a husbandman Leads forth, from some dark spring of earth, a rill Among his planted garden-beds, and clears 3™ Its channel, spade in hand, the pebbles there Move with the current, which runs murmuring down The sloping surface and outstrips its guide, — So rushed the waves where'er Achilles ran, Swift as he was; for mightier are the gods 3»s Than men. As often as the noble son Of Peleus made a stand in hope to know Whether the deathless gods of the great heaven Conspired to make him flee, so often came A mighty billow of the Jove-born stream 330 And drenched his shoulders. Then again he sprang Away; the rapid torrent made his knees To tremble, while it swept, where'er he trod, The earth from underneath his feet. He looked To the broad heaven above him, and complained :— "Will not some god, O Father Jove, put forth 33« His power to save me in my hour of need From this fierce river? Any fate but this I am resigned to suffer. None of all The immortal ones is more in fault than she vn To whom I owe my birth; her treacherous words Deluded me to think that I should fall Beneath the walls of Troy by the swift shafts Of Phoebus. Would that Hector, the most brave Page 244 244 The Iliad. Of warriors reared upon the Trojan soil, Had slain me; he had slain a brave man then, And a brave man had stripped me of my arms. But now it is my fate to perish, caught In this great river, like a swineherd's boy, Who in the time of rains attempts to pass w A torrent, and is overwhelmed and drowned." He spake, and Neptune and Minerva came Quickly and stood beside him. In the form Of men they came, and took his hand, and cheered His spirit with their words. And thus the god ?ss Neptune, who makes the earth to tremble, said :— "Fear not, Pelides, neither let thy heart Be troubled, since thou hast among the gods, By Jove's consent, auxiliars such as I And Pallas. It is not thy doom to be jso Thus vanquished by a river. Soon its rage 'Will cease, as thou shalt see. Meantime we give This counsel; heed it well: let not thy hand Refrain from slaughter till the Trojan host Are all shut up — all that escape thy arm — *s Within the lofty walls of Troy. Then take The life of Hector, and return on board Thy galleys; we will make that glory thine." Thus having spoken, they withdrew and joined The immortals, while Achilles hastened on, 570 Encouraged by the mandate of the gods, Across the plain. The plain was overflowed With water; sumptuous arms were floating round, Page 245 Book XXI. 245 And bodies of slain youths. Achilles leaped, And stemmed with powerful limbs the stream, and Still 37s Went forward; for Minerva mightily Had strengthened him. Nor did Scamander fail To put forth all his power, enraged the more Against the son of Peleus; higher still His torrent swelled and tossed with all its waves, s*, And thus he called to Simois with a shout:— "O brother, join with me to hold in check This man, who threatens soon to overthrow King Priam's noble city; for no more The Trojan host resist him. Come at once ss And aid me; fill thy channel from its springs, And summon all thy brooks, and lift on high A mighty wave, and roll along thy bed, Mingled in one great torrent, trees and stones, That we may tame this savage man, who now 390 In triumph walks the field, and bears himself As if he were a god. His strength, I deem, Will not avail him, nor his noble form, Nor those resplendent arms, which yet shall lie Scattered along the bottom of my gulfs, 39s And foul with ooze. Himself too I shall wrap In sand, and pile the rubbish of my bed In heaps around him. Never shall the Greeks Know where to gather up his bones, o'erspread By me with river-slime, for there shall be ♦» His burial-place; no other tomb the Greeks Page 246 246 The Iliad. Will need when they perform his funeral rites." He spake, and wrathfully he rose against Achilles, — rose with turbid waves, and noise, And foam, and blood and bodies of the dead. *,s One purple billow of the Jove-born stream Swelled high and whelmed Achilles. Juno saw, And trembled lest the hero should be whirled Downward by the great river, and in haste She called to Vulcan, her beloved son :— »'-, "Vulcan, my son, arise! We deemed that thou And eddying Xanthus were of equal might In battle. Come with instant aid, and bring Thy vast array of flames, while from the deep I call a tempest of the winds, — the West »s And the swift South, — and they shall sweep along A fiery torrent to consume the foe, Warriors and weapons. Thou meantime lay waste The groves along the Xanthus; hurl at him Thy fires, nor let him with soft words or threats *«. Avert thy fury. Pause not from the work Of ruin till I shout and give the sign, And then shalt thou restrain thy restless fires." She spake, and Vulcan at her word sent forth His fierce, devouring flames. Upon the plain »;3 They first were kindled, and consumed the dead That strewed it, where Achilles struck them down. The ground was dried; the glimmering flood was stayed. As when the autumnal north-wind, breathing oVr Page 247 Book XXL 247 A newly watered garden, quickly dries «o The clammy mould, and makes the tiller glad, So did the spacious plain grow dry on which The dead were turned to ashes. Then the god Seized on the river with his glittering fires. The elms, the willows, and the tamarisks «« Fell, scorched to cinders, and the lotus-herbs, Rushes, and reeds that richly fringed the banks Of that fair-flowing current were consumed. The eels and fishes, that were wont to glide Hither and thither through the pleasant depths 4*, And eddies, languished in the fiery breath Of Vulcan, mighty artisan. The strength Of the great River withered, and he spake :— "O Vulcan, there is none of all the gods Who may contend with thee. I combat not 4« With fires like thine. Cease then. With my consent The noble son of Peleus may drive out The Trojans from their city. What have I To do with war, — the attack or the defence?" Thus in that fiery glow he spake, while seethed 4?, His pleasant streams. As over a strong fire A caldron filled with fat of pampered swine Glows bubbling on all sides, while underneath Burns the dry fuel, thus were his fair streams Scorched by the heat, and simmered, while the blast Sent forth by Vulcan, the great artisan, 4s4 Tormented him, and he besought the aid Of Juno with these supplicating words : — Page 248 248 The Iliad. "Why should thy son, O Juno, wreak on me His fury, more than on the other gods? «so My fault is less than theirs who give their aid To Troy; and I will cease, if thou command. Bid him desist, and here I pledge my oath Not to attempt to save the Trojan race From ruin, though their city sink in flames *s Before the torches of the warlike Greeks." This when the white-armed goddess Juno heard, She said to Vulcan, her beloved son :— "Dear son, refrain; it is not well that thus A god should suffer for the sake of men." 470 She spake, and Vulcan quenched his dreadful fires, And back the pleasant waters to their bed Went gliding. Xanthus had been made to yield, And the two combatants no longer strove Since Juno, though offended, bade them cease, m Yet was the conflict terrible among The other gods, as zeal for different sides Impelled them. With a loud uproar they met Each other in the field; the spacious earth Rebellowed to the noise, and the great heaven 4so - Returned it. To the ear of Jove it rose, Who, sitting on Olympus, laughed within His secret heart as he beheld the gods Contendmg, for not long they stood apart. Shield-breaking Mars began the assault; he rushed Toward Pallas, brandishing his brazen spear, 4» Page 249 Book XXI. 249 And thus accosted her with insolent words :— "Thou shameless one, thou whose effrontery Is boundless, why wilt thou provoke the gods To strife? Thy temper is most arrogant. «0 Rememberest thou the time when thou didst prompt Tydides Diomed to strike at me? It was thy hand that held his shining spear, And aimed it well, and gave the wound; but now Will I take vengeance on thee for that wrong." 4» He spake, and smote Minerva's fringed shield, The dreadful segis, which not even Jove Could pierce with thunderbolts. The murderous Mars Smote it with his huge spear. She only stepped Backward a space, and with her powerful hand s» Lifted a stone that lay upon the plain, Black, huge, and jagged, which the men of old Had placed there for a landmark. This she hurled At Mars, and struck him on the neck; he fell With nerveless limbs, and covered, as he lay, m Seven acres of the field: his armor clashed Around him in his fall; his locks all soiled Lay in the trodden dust . The goddess stood O'er him, and boasted thus with winged words : — "Fool that thou art, hast thou not learned how much s10 The might I boast excels thine own, that thus Thou measurest strength with me? Now dost thou feel Page 250 The Iliad. Thy mother's curse fulfilled, who meditates Thy chastisement, since thou hast left the Greeks And joined the treaty-breaking sons of Troy." s»s She spake, and turned away her glorious eyes. Jove's daughter, Venus, took the hand of Mars, And led him groaning thence, while hardly yet His strength came back. The white-armed Juno saw, And spake to Pallas thus, with winged words : -— s» "See, daughter of the /Egis-bearer, Jove, Unconquerable maid! that shameless one, Through all the tumult, from the thick of fight, Leads hence the murderous Mars; but follow her." She spake, and Pallas gladly hastened forth, And, overtaking Venus, dealt at her A mighty buffet on the breast; her heart Fainted, her knees gave way; and, as she lay Prostrate with Mars upon the fruitful earth, Exulting Pallas spake these winged words :— s30 "Would that all those who aid the cause of Troy And combat with the mailed Greeks were thus! Would that they were as hardy and as brave As Venus here, who ventured to the help Of Mars, and met the force of my right arm! s« Then had the stately Ilium been o'erthrown Long since, and we had rested from the war." She spake: the white-armed Juno gently smiled. And then King Neptune to Apollo said :— "Why, Phoebus, stand we thus aloof? it ill s4, Page 251 Book XXI. Becomes us, while the other gods engage In conflict. T were a shame should we return Up to Olympus and the brazen halls Of Jove with no blow struck. Begin, for thou Art younger born, and I, who both in years m And knowledge am before thee, must not make The assault. O silly god, and slow of thought 1 Hast thou indeed forgotten all the wrongs We suffered once in Troy, and only we Of all the gods, when, sent to earth by Jove, «0 We served a twelvemonth for a certain hire The proud Laomedon, by whom our tasks Were set? I built a city and a wall Of broad extent, and beautiful, and strong To stand assault; and, Phoebus, thou didst feed sss His stamping oxen, with curved horns, among The lawns of woody Ida seamed with glens. But when the welcome hours had brought the day Of our reward, the ruffian king refused The promised wages, and dismissed us both With menaces; to bind thee hand and foot He threatened, and to sell thee as a slave In distant isles, and to cut off the ears Of both of us. So we returned to heaven, Incensed at him who thus withheld the hire 9i He promised. Dost thou favor Troy for this? Wilt thou not rather act with us until These treaty-breakers, with their children all And their chaste matrons, perish utterly?" Page 252 252 The Iliad- Then thus the archer-king, Aoollo, spake: s7. "Thou wouldst not deem me wise, should I contend With thee, O Neptune, for the ;ike of men, Who flourish like the forest-leaves awhile, And feed upon the fruits of earth- and then Decay and perish. Let us quit the field, r» And leave the combat to the warring hosts." He spake, and turned, afraid to meet in arms His uncle; but the sylvan Dian he?.id,— His sister, mistress of the beasts that range The wilds, —and harshly thus upbraided him :— s*, "O mighty Archer, dost thou flee an-1 yield The victory to Neptune, who bears off A glory cheaply earned? Why dost thcu bear That idle bow, thou coxcomb? I shall hope No more to hear thee in our father's halls. 3»s And in the presence of the immortals, \xy\-\ That thou wilt fight with Neptune hand to kv.d." The archer-god, Apollo, answered not; But thus the imperial wife of Jupiter, Indignantly and with reproachful words, »0 Rebuked the quivered goddess of the chase "How is it that thou darest, shameless one, Resist me? Thou wilt find it hard, though tr.-,ned In archery, to match thy strength with mine, Though Jove has made thee among womankind •* A lioness, and though he gives thee power To slay whomever of thy sex thou wilt; Yet wilt thou find it easier to strike down Page 253 Book XXL 253 The mountain beasts of prey, and forest deer, Than combat with thy betters. If thou choose *«&gt; To try the event of battle, then put forth Thy strength against me, and thou shalt be taught How greatly I excel in might of arm." Thus Juno spake, and grasped in her left hand Both Dian's wrists, and, plucking with her right **, The quiver from her shoulders, beat with it Her ears, and smiled as under her quick blows The sufferer writhed. To earth the arrows fell, And Dian weeping fled. As when a dove, Not fated to be overtaken yet, Flees from a hawk to find her hiding-place, The hollow rock, so Dian fled in tears, And left her arrows. To Latona, then, Heaven's messenger, the Argus-queller, spake: — "Far be it from me to contend with thee, «is Latona; perilous it were to meet A consort of the Cloud-compeller, Jove, In combat. Go and freely make thy boast Among the gods that thou hast vanquished me." He spake: Latona gathered from the ground » fhe bow and shafts which in that whirl of dust Had fallen here and there, and, bearing them, Followed her daughter, who meantime had reached Olympus and the brazen halls of Jove. And there, a daughter at her father's knees, ut She sat her down, while, as she wept, her robe Of heavenly texture trembled. Graciously Page 254 254 The Iliad. Jove smiled, and drew her toward him and inquired: "What dweller of the sky has dared do this, Dear child, as though some flagrant guilt were thine?" And thus replied the mistress of the chase *i, Crowned with the crescent: "Father, 't was thy queen, The white-armed Juno; she who causes strife And wrath among the gocls has done me wrong." So talked they, while to sacred Ilium came *n Phoebus Apollo; 't was his charge to watch The well-built city's ramparts, lest the Greeks That day should lay it waste against the will Of fate. The other gods went back to heaven, Some angry, some exulting. They sat down tm Beside the All-Father, him who darkens heaven With gathered clouds. Meantime Achilles chased And slew the Trojans and their firm-paced steeds. As, when the smoke rolls heavenward from a town (liven by the angry gods a prey to fire, «« Toil is the lot of all, and bitter woe The fate of many, such the woe and toil Caused by Achilles to the sons of Troy. The aged Priam from a lofty tower Beheld the large-limbed son of Peleus range The field, and all the Trojans helplessly Fleeing in tumult. With a cry of grief He came from that high station to the ground, And gave commandment to the sturdy men Who stood to watch the gates along the wall:— oss Page 255 Book XXI. 255 "Hold the gates open while the flying host Enter the city; for Achilles comes, Routing them, near at hand, and we may see Terrible havoc. But when all our troops Are once within the walls, and breathe again, «,• Shut the close-fitting portals; for I dread Lest that fierce warrior rush into our streets." He spake: they drew the bolts and opened wide The gates, and gave a refuge to the host. Then leaped Apollo forth to meet their flight And rescue them. All faint with burning thirst, And grimed with dust, they hurried o'er the plain, And toward the city and its lofty walls, While eagerly Achilles on their track Pressed with his spear; his heart was full of rage, 070 And all on fire his spirit with desire For glory. Then the Greeks had overthrown The towery Troy, if Phoebus had not moved Agenor, a young hero, nobly born. Blameless, and brave, Antenor's son, to meet «7s Achilles. Phoebus breathed into his heart Courage, as, standing by the youth, he leaned Against a beechen tree, and, wrapped from sight In darkness, watched to rescue him from death. Agenor stood as he beheld approach e&gt; The mighty spoiler, and, perplexed in mind, Sighed heavily, and said to his great soul :— "Ah me! if with the routed troops I flee From fierce Achilles, he will overtake Page 256 256 The Iliad. And slay me; I shall die as cowards die. «s But if I leave the host to be pursued By Peleus' son, and by another way Flee from the wall across the plain, until I reach the lawns of Ida, and am hid Among its thickets, then I may at eve «90 Bathe in the river and return refreshed To Troy. But why give way to thoughts like these? For he may yet observe me as I haste From Ilium o'er the plain, and his swift feet May follow; there will then be no escape «;s From death and fate, since he in might of arm Excels all other men. If now I here Confront him before Troy, I cannot think That he is weapon-proof; one life alone Dwells in him, though Saturnian Jupiter 7~ Bestows on him the glory of the day." He spake, and firmly waited for the son Of Peleus; eagerly his fearless heart Longed for the combat. As a panther leaves The covert of the wood and comes to meet 70s A huntsman, nor is scared nor put to flight By noise of baying hounds, not even though A spear's thrust or a javelin flung from far Have wounded him, yet, wounded, he fights on, Until he grapples with his enemy 7,o Or perishes, — thus did the noble son Of the renowned Antenor press to try His prowess with Achilles, and disdained Page 257 Book XXI. 257 To flee before him. Holding his round shield Before his face, and with his lifted spear 7,s Aimed at the Greek, he shouted thus aloud :— "Renowned Achilles! thou dost fondly nope That thou to-day wilt overthrow the town Of the magnanimous Trojans. Many toils, Thou fool! must be endured ere that can be; 7» For we are many and are brave who dwell Within it, and shall well defend the town For our beloved parents and our wives And little ones. Here shall thou meet thy doom, Brave as thou art, and terrible in war." 7»s As thus he spake, his powerful hand dismissed The keen-edged spear, nor missed his aim; it struck The son of Peleus just below the knee. The tin of which the greave was newly forged Rang shrilly, and sent back the brazen point; iy, It could not pierce the armor which a god Had given. And then the son of Peleus aimed His weapon at Agenor. Phoebus came And snatched away his triumph, bearing off The godlike youth, Agenor, in a veil 7« Of darkness from the perils of the war. Then he decoyed Achilles from the host Of Troy; the archer of the skies put on Agenor's perfect semblance, and appeared Before the Greek, and fled; his hasty flight 7*, Was followed close. Achilles chased the god Ever before him, yet still near, across Q Page 258 258 The Iliad. The fruitful fields, to the deep-eddied stream Of Xanthus; for Apollo artfully Made it to seem that he should soon o'ertake His flying foe, and thus beguiled him on. Meantime the routed Trojans gladly thronged Into the city, filled the streets, and closed The portals. None now dared without the walls To wait for others, or remain to know Who had escaped with life, and who were slain In battle; eagerly they flung themselves Into the city, — every one whose feet And knees had borne him from the field alive.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
