<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">The contention of Achilles and Agamemnon</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The visit of Chryses, Priest of Apollo, to Agamemnon, asking the ransom of his daughter.—Refusal of Agamemnon.—A pestilence sent by Apollo upon the Greek Army.—A Council called by Achilles.—The Cause of the Pestilence declared by the Seer Calchas.—Dispute between Agamemnon and Achilles, which ends with the taking away of Briseis from Achilles.—The daughter of Chryses restored to him.—Visit of Thetis to Jupiter, who promises to avenge Achilles.—Mutual chiding of Jupiter and Juno.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<p>
				<span>O Goddess! sing the wrath of Peleus' son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles; sing the deadly wrath that brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woes numberless upon the Greeks, and swept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hades many a valiant soul, and gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their limbs a prey to dogs and birds of air,—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so had Jove appointed, — from the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the two chiefs, Atrides, king of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And great Achilles, parted first as foes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which of the gods put strife between the chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they should thus contend? Latona's son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Jove's. Incensed against the king, he bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A deadly pestilence appear among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The army, and the men were perishing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Atreus' son with insult had received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chryses the priest, who to the Grecian fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to redeem his daughter, offering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncounted ransom. In his hand he bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fillets of Apollo, archer-god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the golden sceptre, and he sued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the Greeks, but chiefly to the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus, the two leaders of the host:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Ye sons of Atreus, and ye other chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well-greaved Achaians, may the gods who dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon Olympus give you to o'erthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city of Priam, and in safety reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your homes; but give me my beloved child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take her ransom, honoring him who sends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arrows far, Apollo, son of Jove."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then all the other Greeks, applauding, bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revere the priest and take the liberal gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He offered, but the counsel did not please</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides Agamemnon; he dismissed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The priest with scorn,and added threatening words:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Old man, let me not find thee loitering here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the roomy ships, or coming back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter, lest the fillet thou dost bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sceptre of thy god protect thee not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This maiden I release not till old age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall overtake her in my Argive home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from her native country, where her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall throw the shuttle and shall dress my couch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, chafe me not, if thou wouldst safely go."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake; the aged man in fear obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mandate, and in silence walked apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the many-sounding ocean-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fervently he prayed the monarch-god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo, golden-haired Latona's son:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Hear me, thou bearer of the silver bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who guardest Chrysa, and the holy isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Cilia, and art lord in Tenedos,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Smintheus! if I ever helped to deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy glorious temple, if I ever burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thy altar the fat thighs of goats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bullocks, grant my prayer, and let thy shafts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avenge upon the Greeks the tears I shed."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So spake he supplicating, and to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus Apollo hearkened. Down he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down from the summit of the Olympian mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrathful in heart; his shoulders bore the bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hollow quiver; there the arrows rang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the shoulders of the angry god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on he moved. He came as comes the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, seated from the ships aloof, sent forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An arrow; terrible was heard the clang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that resplendent bow. At first he smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mules and the swift dogs, and then on man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned the deadly arrow. All around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glared evermore the frequent funeral piles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine days already had his shafts been showered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the host, and now, upon the tenth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles called the people of the camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To council. Juno, of the snow-white arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had moved his mind to this, for she beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sorrow that the men were perishing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the assembly met and now was full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood swift Achilles in the midst and said:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"To me it seems, Atrides, that 't were well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since now our aim is baffled, to return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homeward, if death o'ertake us not; for war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pestilence at once destroy the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let us first consult some seer or priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or dream-interpreter,—for even dreams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are sent by Jove,—and ask him by what cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoebus Apollo has been angered thus;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If by neglected vows or hecatombs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whether savor of fat bulls and goats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May move the god to stay the pestilence."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake, and took again his seat; and next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose Calchas, son of Thestor, and the chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of augurs, one to whom were known things past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And present and to come. He, through the art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of divination, which Apollo gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had guided Iliumward the ships of Greece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With words well ordered courteously he spake:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Achilles, loved of Jove, thou biddest me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Explain the wrath of Phoebus, monarch-god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sends afar his arrows. Willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will I make known the cause; but covenant thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swear to stand prepared, by word and hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring me succor. For my mind misgives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he who rules the Argives, and to whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaian race are subject, will be wroth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sovereign is too strong for humbler men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though he keep his choler down awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It rankles, till he sate it, in his heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now consider: wilt thou hold me safe?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, the swift-footed, answered thus:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Fear nothing, but speak boldly out whate'er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou knowest, and declare the will of Heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For by Apollo, dear to Jove, whom thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calchas, dost pray to, when thou givest forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred oracles to men of Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man, while yet I live, and see the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of day, shall lay a violent hand on thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among our roomy ships; no man of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Grecian armies, though thou name the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Agamemnon, whose high boast it is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stand in power and rank above them all."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encouraged thus, the blameless seer went on:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"’T is not neglected vows or hecatombs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That move him, but the insult shown his priest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Agamemnon spurned, when he refused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To set his daughter free, and to receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her ransom. Therefore sends the archer-god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These woes, and still will send them on the Greeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ever will withdraw his heavy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From our destruction, till the dark-eyed maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freely, and without ransom, be restored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her beloved father, and with her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sacred hecatomb to Chrysa sent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So may we haply pacify the god."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus having said, the augur took his seat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the hero-son of Atreus rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide-ruling Agamemnon, greatly chafed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His gloomy heart was full of wrath, his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sparkled like fire; he fixed a menacing look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full on the augur Calchas, and began :—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Prophet of evil! never hadst thou yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cheerful word for me. To mark the signs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of coming mischief is thy great delight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good dost thou ne'er foretell not bring to pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now thou pratest, in thine auguries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the Greeks, how that the archer-god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afflicts us thus, because I would not take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The costly ransom offered to redeem us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The virgin child of Chryses. ’T was my choice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep her with me, for I prize her more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than Clytemnestra, bride of my young years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deem her not less nobly graced than she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In form and feature, mind and pleasing arts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet will I give her back, if that be best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For gladly would I see my people saved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this destruction. Let meet recompense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime, be ready, that I be not left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone of all the Greeks, without my prize.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That were not seemly. All of you perceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That now my share of spoil has passed from me."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him the great Achilles, swift of foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replied: "Renowned Atrides, greediest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men, where wilt thou that our noble Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find other spoil for thee, since none is set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart, a common store? The trophies brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From towns which we have sacked have all been shared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among us, and we could not without shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid every warrior bring his portion back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield, then, the maiden to the god, and we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Achaians, freely will appoint for thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threefold and fourfold recompense, should Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give up to sack this well-defended Troy."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the king Agamemnon answered thus:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Nay, use no craft, all valiant as thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Godlike Achilles; thou hast rot the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To circumvent nor to persuade me thus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think'st thou that, while thou keepest safe thy prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall sit idly down, deprived of mine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou bid'st me give the maiden back. ’T is well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If to my hands the noble Greeks shall bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The worth of what I lose, and in a shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That pleases me. Else will I come myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seize and bear away thy prize, or that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ajax or Ulysses, leaving him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whom I take his share with cause for rage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another time we will confer of this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now come, and forth into the great salt sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Launch a black ship, and muster on the deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men skilled to row, and put a hecatomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On board, and let the fair-cheeked maid embark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chryseis. Send a prince to bear command,—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ajax, Idomeneus, or the divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses;— or thyself, Pelides, thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most terrible of men, that with due rites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou soothe the anger of the archer-god."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles the swift-footed, with stern look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus answered: "Ha, thou mailed in impudence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bent on lucre! Who of all the Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can willingly obey thee, on the march,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or bravely battling with the enemy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I came not to this war because of wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Done to me by the valiant sons of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No feud had I with them; they never took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My beeves or horses, nor, in Phthia's realm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep-soiled and populous, spoiled my harvest fields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many a shadowy mount between us lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waters of the wide-resounding sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man unabashed! we follow thee that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mayst glory in avenging upon Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grudge of Menelaus and thy own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shameless one! and yet thou hast for this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor thanks nor care. Thou threatenest now to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From me the prize for which I bore long toils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle; and the Greeks decreed it mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never take an equal share with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of booty when the Grecian host has sacked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some populous Trojan town. My hands perform</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The harder labors of the field in all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tumult of the fight; but when the spoil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is shared, the largest share of all is thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I, content with little, seek my ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weary with combat. I shall now go home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Phthia; better were it to return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my beaked ships; but here, where I am held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In little honor, thou wilt fail, I think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gather, in large measure, spoil and wealth."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him answered Agamemnon, king of men:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Desert, then, if thou wilt; I ask thee not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stay for me; there will be others left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do me honor yet, and, best of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The all-providing Jove is with me still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee I detest the most of all the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ordained by him to govern; thy delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in contention, war, and bloody frays.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou art brave, some deity, no doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath thus endowed thee. Hence, then, to thy home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all thy ships and men! there domineer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over thy Myrmidons; I heed thee not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor care I for thy fury. Thus, in turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I threaten thee; since Phoebus takes away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chryseis, I will send her in my ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with my friends, and, coming to thy tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will bear away the fair-cheeked maid, thy prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Briseis, that thou learn how far I stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above thee, and that other chiefs may fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To measure strength with me, and brave my power."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rage of Peleus' son, as thus he spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew fiercer; in that shaggy breast his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took counsel, whether from his thigh to draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trenchant sword, and, thrusting back the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smite down Atrides, or subdue his wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And master his own spirit. While he thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Debated with himself, and half unsheathed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ponderous blade, Pallas Athene came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent from on high by Juno, the white-armed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who loved both warriors and made both her care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She came behind him, seen by him alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plucked his yellow hair. The hero turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wonder, and at once he knew the look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pallas and the awful-gleaming eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus accosted her with winged words:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Why com'st thou hither, daughter of the god</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bears the aegis? Art thou here to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The insolence of Agamemnon, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Atreus? Let me tell thee what I deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be the event. That man may lose his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quickly too, for arrogance like this."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then thus the goddess, blue-eyed Pallas, spake:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I came from heaven to pacify thy wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou wilt heed my counsel. I am sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Juno the white-armed, to whom ye both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are dear, who ever watches o'er you both.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refrain from violence; let not thy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unsheathe the sword, but utter with thy tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reproaches, as occasion may arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I declare what time shall bring to pass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threefold amends shall yet be offered thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In gifts of princely cost, for this day's wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now calm thy angry spirit, and obey."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, the swift-footed, answered thus:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"O goddess, be the word thou bring'st obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However fierce my anger; for to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hearkens to the gods, the gods give ear."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So speaking, on the silver hilt he stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His strong right hand, and back into its sheath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrust his good sword, obeying. She, meantime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returned to heaven, where aegis-bearing Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwells with the other gods. And now again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides, with opprobrious words, bespake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Atreus, venting thus his wrath:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Wine-bibber, with the forehead of a dog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a deer's heart! Thou never yet hast dared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To arm thyself for battle with the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor join the other chiefs prepared to lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ambush,—such thy craven fear of death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better it suits thee, midst the mighty host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greeks, to rob some warrior of his prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dares withstand thee. King thou art, and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devourer of thy people. Thou dost rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spiritless race, else this day's insolence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides, were thy last. And now I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bind my saying with a mighty oath:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By this my sceptre, which can never bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A leaf or twig, since first it left its stem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the mountains,—for the steel has pared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its boughs and bark away, to sprout no more,—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the Achaian judges bear it,—they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who guard the laws received from Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such is my oath,—the time shall come when all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks shall long to see Achilles back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While multitudes are perishing by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hector, the man-queller; thou, meanwhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though thou lament, shalt have no power to help,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shalt rage against thyself to think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou hast scorned the bravest of the Greeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thus he spake, Pelides to the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flung the gold-studded wand, and took his seat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fiercely Atrides raged; but now uprose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nestor, the master of persuasive speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clear-toned Pylian orato, whose tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dropped words more sweet than honey. He had seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two generations that grew up and lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With him on sacred Pylos pass away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he ruled the third. With prudent words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thus addressed the assembly of the chiefs:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Ye gods ! what new misfortunesthreaten Greece!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How Priam would exult and Priam's sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how would all the Trojan race rejoice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were they to know how furiously ye strive,—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye who in council and in fight surpass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other Greeks. Now hearken to my words,—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye who are younger than myself,—for I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have lived with braver men than you, and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They held me not in light esteem. Such men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never saw, nor shall I see again,—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men like Pirithoiis and like Druas, lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of nations, Caeneus and Exadius,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the great Polypheme, and Theseus, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aegeus, likest to the immortal gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strongest of all the earth-born race they fought—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strongest with the strongest of their time—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Centaurs, the wild dwellers of the hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fearfully destroyed them. With these men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did I hold converse, coming to their camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Pylos in a distant land. They sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bid me join the war, and by their side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fought my best, but no man living now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the wide earth would dare to fight with them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great as they were, they listened to my words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took my counsel. Hearken also ye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let my words persuade you for the best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, powerful as thou art, take not from him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maiden; suffer him to keep the prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decreed him by the sons of Greece; and thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides, strive no longer with the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since never Jove on sceptred prince bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like eminence to his. Though braver thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And goddess-born, yet hath he greater power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wider sway. Atrides, calm thy wrath—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’T is I who ask—against the chief who stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bulwark of the Greeks in this fierce war."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him the sovereign Agamemnon said:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"The things which thou hast uttered, aged chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are fitly spoken; but this man would stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above all others; he aspires to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The master, over all to domineer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to direct in all things; yet, I think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There may be one who will not suffer this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if by favor of the immortal gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was made brave, have they for such a cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given him the liberty of insolent speech?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereat the great Achilles, breaking in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered: "Yea, well might I deserve the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of coward and of wretch, should I submit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all things to thy bidding. Such commands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay thou on others, not on me; nor think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall obey thee longer. This I say,—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear it well in mind,— I shall not lift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My hand to keep the maiden whom ye gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now take from me; but whatever else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be on board that swift black ship of mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beware thou carry not away the least</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without my leave. Come, make the trial now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That these may see thy black blood bathe my spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, rising from that strife of words, the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dissolved the assembly at the Grecian fleet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelides to his tents and well manned ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went with Patroclus and his warrior friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Agamemnon bade upon the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Launch a swift bark with twenty chosen men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ply the oar, and put a hecatomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon it for the god. He thither led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-cheeked maid Chryseis; the command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave to wise Ulysses; forth they went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leader and crew, upon their watery path.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile, he bade the camp be purified;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straight the warriors purified the camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, casting the pollutions to the waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They burned to Phoebus chosen hecatombs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bulls and goats beside the barren main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which the savor rose in smoke to heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So was the host employed. But not the less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Agamemnon persevere to urge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His quarrel with Pelides; and he thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Addressed Talthybius and Eurybates.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heralds and his faithful ministers:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Go ye to where Achilles holds his tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take the fair Briseis by the hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bring her hither. If he yield her not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall come forth to claim her with a band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of warriors, and it shall be worse for him."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake, and sent them forth with added words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of menace. With unwilling steps they went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the barren deep, until they reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tents and vessels of the Myrmidons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And found Achilles seated by his tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his black ship; their coming pleased him not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They, moved by fear and reverence of the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stopped, and bespake him not, nor signified</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their errand; he perceived their thought and said:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Hail, heralds, messengers of Jove and men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw near; I blame you not. I only blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atrides, who hath sent you for the maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noble Patroclus I bring the damsel forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let them lead her hence. My witnesses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are ye, before the blessed deities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mortal men, and this remorseless king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ever he shall need me to avert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doom of utter ruin from his host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most sure it is, he madly yields himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fatal counsels, thoughtless of the past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the future, nor forecasting how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Greeks may fight, unvanquished, by their fleet."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake. Meantime Patroclus had obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The word of his beloved friend. He brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-cheeked maid Briseis from the tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she was led away. The messengers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returned to where their barks were moored, and she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwillingly went with them. Then in tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, from his friends withdrawing, sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the hoary ocean-marge, and gazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the black deep beyond, and stretched his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prayed to his dear mother, earnestly:— </span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Mother! since thou didst bring me forth to dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brief space on earth, Olympian Jupiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who thunders in the highest, should have filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That space with honors, but he grants them not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide-ruling Agamemnon takes and holds us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prize I won, and thus dishonors me."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus, shedding tears, he spake. His mother heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sitting within the ocean deeps, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her aged father. Swiftly from the waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the gray deep emerging like a cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sat before him as he wept, and smoothed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brow with her soft hand, and kindly said:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"My child, why weepest thou? What grief is this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak, and hide nothing, so that both may know."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, swift of foot, sighed heavily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said: "Thou know'st already. Why relate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These things to thee, who art apprised of all?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"To Thebe, to Eeiion's sacred town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We marched, and plundered it, and hither brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The booty, which was fairly shared among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of Greece, and Agamemnon took The fair-cheeked maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chryseis as his prize. But Chryses, priest of Phoebus, to the fleet Of the Achaian warriors, brazen-mailed, Came, to redeem his daughter, offering *s Ransom uncounted. In his hand he bore The fillets of Apollo, archer-god, Upon the golden sceptre, and he sued To all the Greeks, but chiefly to the sons Of Atrcus, the two leaders of the host. 470 Then all the other chiefs, applauding, bade Revere the priest and take the liberal gifts He offered ; but the counsel did not please Atrides Agamemnon : he dismissed The priest with scorn, and added threatening words. The aged man indignantly withdrew; And Phoebus — for the priest was dear to him — Granted his prayer and sent among the Greeks A deadly shaft. The people of the camp Were perishing in heaps. His arrows flew «, Among the Grecian army, far and wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A seer expert in oracles revealed The will of Phoebus, and I was the first To counsel that the god should be appeased. But Agamemnon rose in sudden wrath, Uttering a threat, which he has since fulfilled. And now the dark-eyed Greeks are taking back His child to Chryses, and with her they bear Gifts to the monarch-god ; while to my tent Heralds have come, and borne away the maid Briseis, given me by the sons of Greece. But succor thou thy son, if thou hast power; Ascend to heaven and bring thy prayer to Jove, If e'er by word or act thou gav'st him aid. For I remember, in my father's halls I often heard thee, glorying, tell how thou, Alone of all the gods, didst interpose To save the cloud-compeller, Saturn's son, From shameful overthrow, when all the rest Who dwell upon Olympus had conspired To bind him, —Juno, Neptune, and with them Pallas Athene. Thou didst come and loose His bonds, and call up to the Olympian heights The hundred-handed, whom the immortal gods H ive named Briareus, but the sons of men /Egeon, mightier than his sire in strength; And he, rejoicing in the honor, took His seat by Jove, and all the immortals shrank Aghast before him, and let fall the chains. Remind him of all this, and, sitting down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embrace his knees, and pray him to befriend The Trojans, that the Greeks, hemmed in and slain Beside their ships and by the shore, may learn To glory in their king, and even he, Wide-ruling Agamemnon, may perceive s,s How grievous was his folly when he dared To treat with scorn the bravest of the Greeks." And Thetis answered, weeping as she spake : — "Alas, my son, why did I rear thee, born To sorrow as thou wert? O would that thou s*, Unwronged, and with no cause for tears, couldst dwell Beside thy ships, since thou must die so soon. I brought thee forth in an unhappy hour, Short-lived and wronged beyond all other men. Yet will I climb the Olympian height among st Its snows and make my suit to Jupiter The Thunderer, if haply he may yield To my entreaties. Thou, meanwhile, abide By thy swift ships, incensed against the Greeks, And take no part in all their battles more. s30 But yesterday did Jove depart to hold A banquet far in Ocean's realm, among The blameless Ethiopians, and with him Went all the train of gods. Twelve days must pass Ere he return to heaven, and I will then s3s Enter his brazen palace, clasp his knees, And hope to move his purpose by my prayers." So saying, she departed, leaving him In anger for the shapely damsel's sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom forcibly they took away. Meantime m» Ulysses, with the sacred hecatomb, Arrived at Chrysa. Entering the deep port, They folded up the sails and laid them down In the black ship, and lowering the mast, With all its shrouds, they brought it to its place, m Then to the shore they urged the bark with oars, And cast the anchors and secured the prow With fastenings. Next, they disembarked and stood Upon the beach and placed the hecatomb In sight of Phoebus, the great archer. Last, k» Chryseis left the deck, and, leading her Up to the altar, wise Ulysses gave The maid to her dear father, speaking thus :— "O Chryses! Agamemnon, king of men, Sends me in haste to bring this maid to thee ks And offer up this hallowed hecatomb To Phoebus, for the Greeks : that so the god, Whose wrath afflicts us sore, may be appeased. So speaking, to her father's hands he gave The maiden ; joyfully the priest received s*, The child he loved. Then did the Greeks array The noble hecatomb in order round The sculptured altar, and with washen hands They took the salted meal, while Chryses stood And spread abroad his hands and prayed aloud :— » "Hear me, thou bearer of the glittering bow, Who guardest Chrysa and the pleasant isle Of Cilia and art lord in Tenedos!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already hast thou listened to my prayer And honored me, and terribly hast scourged s70 The Achaian people. Hear me yet again, And cause the plague that wastes the Greeks to cease." So spake he, supplicating, and to him Phoebus Apollo hearkened. When the prayers Were ended, and the salted meal was flung, s7s Backward they turned the necks of the fat beeves, And cut their throats, and flayed the carcasses, And hewed away the thighs, and covered them With caul in double folds; and over this They laid raw fragments of the other parts. r-o O'er all the aged priest poured dark red wine, And burned them on dry wood. A band of youths With five-pronged spits, beside him, thrust these through The entrails, which they laid among the flames. And when the thighs were all consumed, and next sss The entrails tasted, all the rest was carved Into small portions and transfixed with spits And roasted with nice care and then withdrawn From the hot coals. This task performed, they made The banquet ready. All became its guests s90 And all were welcome to the equal feast. And when their thirst and hunger were allayed, Boys crowned the ample urns with wreaths, and served The wine to all, and poured libations forth. Meantime the Argive youths, that whole day long, s-vs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang to appease the god; they chanted forth High anthems to the archer of the skies. He listened to the strain, and his stern mood Was softened. When, at length, the sun went down And darkness fell, they gave themselves to sleep ,»» Beside the fastenings of their ships, and when Appeared the rosy-fingered Dawn, the child Of Morning, they returned to the great host Of the Achaians. Phoebus deigned to send A favoring breeze; at once they reared the mast And opened the white sails; the canvas swelled Before the wind, and hoarsely round the keel The dark waves murmured as the ship flew on. So ran she, cutting through the sea her way. But when they reached the great Achaian host, 'i0 They drew their vessel high upon the shore Among the sands, and underneath its sides They laid long beams to prop the keel, and straight Dispersed themselves among the tents and ships. The goddess-born Achilles, swift of foot, «.s Beside his ships still brooded o'er his wrath, Nor came to council with the illustrious chiefs, Nor to the war, but suffered idleness To eat his heart away; for well he loved Clamor and combat. But when now. at length, The twelfth day came, the ever-living gods Returned together to the Olympian mount With Jove, their leader. Thetis kept in mind Her son's desire, and, with the early morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Emerging from the depths of ocean, climbed *,s To the great heaven and the high mount, and found All-seeing Jove, who, from the rest apart, Was seated on the loftiest pinnacle Of many-peaked Olympus. She sat down Before the son of Saturn, clasped his knees «30 With her left arm, and lifted up her right In supplication to the Sovereign One: — "O Jupiter, my father, if among The immortals 1 have ever given thee aid By word or act, deny not my request. Honor my son, whose life is doomed to end So soon; for Agamemnon, king of men, Hath done him shameful wrong: he takes from him And keeps the prize he won in war. But thou, Olympian Jupiter, supremely wise, «« Honor him thou, and give the Trojan host The victory, until the humbled Greeks Heap large increase of honors on my son." She spake, but cloud-compelling Jupiter Answered her not; in silence long he sat. »4s But Thetis, who had clasped his knees at first, Clung to them still, and prayed him yet again : — "O promise me, and grant my suit; or else Deny it, — for thou need'st not fear, — and I Shall know how far below the other gods 's0 Thou holdest me in honor." As she spake, The Cloud-compeller, sighing heavily, Answered her thus: "Hard things dost thou require,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou wilt force me into new disputes With Juno, who will anger me again «s With contumelious words; for ever thus, In presence of the immortals, doth she seek Cause of contention, charging that I aid The Trojans in their battles. Now depart, And let her not perceive thee. Leave the rest «*, To be by me accomplished; and that thou Mayst be assured, behold, I give the nod; For this, with me, the immortals know, portends The highest certainty: no word of mine Which once my nod confirms can be revoked, «s Or prove untrue, or fail to be fulfilled." As thus he spake, the son of Saturn gave The nod with his dark brows. The ambrosial curls Upon the Sovereign One's immortal head Were shaken, and with thcm the mighty mount «70 Olympus trembled. Then they parted, she Plunging from bright Olympus to the deep, And Jove returning to his palace home; Where all the gods, uprising from their thrones, At sight of the Great Father, waited not «73 For his approach, but met him as he came. And now upon his throne the Godhead took His seat, but Juno knew— for she had seen — That Thetis of the silver feet, and child Of the gray Ancient of the Deep, had held ra» Close council with her consort. Therefore she Bespake the son of Saturn harshly, thus:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"O crafty one, with whom, among the gods, Plottest thou now? Thus hath it ever been Thy pleasure to devise, apart from me, «s Thy plans in secret; never willingly Dost thou reveal to me thy purposes." Then thus replied the Father of the gods And mortals: "Juno, do not think to know All my designs, for thou wilt find the task c*p Too hard for thee, although thou be my spouse. What fitting is to be revealed, no one Of all the immortals or of men shall know Sooner than thou; but when I form designs Apart from all the gods, presume thou not «9s To question me or pry into my plans." Juno, the large-eyed and august, rejoined :— "What words, stern son of Saturn, hast thou said! It never was my wont to question thee Or pry into thy plans, and thou art left 700 To form them as thou wilt; yet now I fear The silver-footed Thetis has contrived — That daughter of the Ancient of the Deep — To o'erpersuade thee, for, at early prime, She sat before thee and embraced thy knees; 70s And thou hast promised her, I cannot doubt, To give Achilles honor and to cause Myriads of Greeks to perish by their fleet." , Then Jove, the cloud-compeller, spake again :— "Harsh-tongued! thou ever dost suspect me thus, Nor can I act unwatched; and yet all this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Profits thee nothing, for it only serves To breed dislike, and is the worse for thee. But were it as thou deemest, 't is enough That such has been my pleasure. Sit thou down In silence, and obey, lest all the gods 71» Upon Olympus, when I come and lay These potent hands on thee, protect thee not." He spake, and Juno, large-eyed and august, O'erawed, and curbing her high spirit, sat 7~ In silence; meanwhile all the gods of heaven Within the halls of Jove were inly grieved. But Vulcan, the renowned artificer, Sought to console his mother in her grief, — The white-armed Juno, — and thus interposed : — "Great will the evil be and hard to bear, i*, If, for the sake of mortals, ye are moved To such contention and the assembled gods Disturbed with discord. Even the pleasant feast Will lose its flavor when embittered thus. iv And let me warn my mother while I speak, Wise as she is, that she defer to Jove, Lest the All-Father angrily again Reply, and spoil the banquet of the day. The Thunderer of Olympus, if he choose w To make a wreck of all things, wields a power Far greater than we all. Accost him thou With gentle speeches, and the Lord of heaven Will then regard us in a kindly mood." As thus he spake, he gave into the hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his beloved mother the round cup Of double form, and thus he spake again :— "Mother, be patient and submit, although In sadness, lest these eyes behold thee yet Beaten with stripes, and though I hold thee dear 7« And grieve for thee, I cannot bring thee help; For hard it is to strive with Jupiter. Already once, when I took part with thee, He seized me by the foot and flung me o'er The battlements of heaven. All day I fell, 7«0 And with the setting sun I struck the earth In Lemnos. Little life was left in me, What time the Sintians took me from the ground." He spake, and Juno, the white-shouldered, smiled, And smiling took the cup her son had brought; 7ss And next he poured to all the other gods Sweet nectar from the jar, beginning first With those at the right hand. As they beheld Lame Vulcan laboring o'er the palace-floor, An inextinguishable laughter broke 7«o From all the blessed gods. So feasted they All day till sunset. From that equal feast None stood aloof, nor from the pleasant sound Of harp, which Phoebus touched, nor from the voice Of Muses singing sweetly in their turn. 7«s But when the sun's all-glorious light was down, Each to his sleeping-place betook himself; For Vulcan, the lame god, with marvellous art, Had framed for each the chamber of his rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Jupiter, the Olympian Thunderer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went also to his couch, where't was his wont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When slumber overtook him, to recline.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, beside him, slept the white-armed queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Juno, the mistress of the golden throne</span>
				</p>
				</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>