<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">The Trial of the Army, and Catalogue of the Forces</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">A treacherous Dream sent by Jupiter to Agamemnon, who assembles th Army in the Hope to take Troy.—Debate of the Chiefs in Council.—Agamemnon pretends a Desire to return to Greece, in Order to try the Disposition of the Army.—Insolent Speech of Tbersites, and his Punishment by Ulysses.—Advice of Nestor to review the Troops.—Catalogue of the Troops and Ships.—Enumeration of the Trojan Forces.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<p>
				<span>All other deities, all mortal men, Tamers of war-steeds, slept the whole night through; But no sweet slumber came to Jove; his thoughts Were ever busy with the anxious care To crown with honor Peleus' son, and cause , Myriads to perish at the Grecian fleet. At last, this counsel seemed the best, — to send A treacherous dream to Agamemnon, son Of Atreus. Then he called a Dream, and thus Addressing it with winged words, he said : — to "Go, fatal Vision, to the Grecian fleet, And, entering Agamemnon's tent, declare Faithfully what I bid thee. Give command That now he arm, with all the array of war, The long-haired Greeks, for lo, the hour is come is That gives into his hands the city of Troy With all its spacious streets. The powers who dwell In the celestial mansions are no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At variance; Juno's prayers have moved them all, And o'er the Trojans hangs a fearful doom." *, So spake the God; the Vision heard, and went At once to where the Grecian barks were moored, And entered Agamemnon's tent and found The king reposing, with the balm of sleep Poured all around him. At his head the Dream »s Took station in the form of Neleus' son, Nestor, whom Agamemnon honored most Of all the aged men. In such a shape The heaven-sent Dream to Agamemnon spake : — "O warrior-son of Atreus, sleepest thou? y, Tamer of steeds! It ill becomes a chief, Who has the charge of nations and sustains Such mighty cares, to sleep the livelong night. Give earnest heed to me, for I am come A messenger from Jove, who, though far off, 3s Takes part in thy concerns and pities thee. He bids thee arm, with all the array of war, The long-haired Greeks, for now the hour is come Which gives into thy hands the city of Troy With all its spacious streets. The powers that dwell In the celestial mansions are no more 41 At variance; Juno's prayers have moved them all, And o'er the Trojans hangs a fearful doom, Decreed by Jove. Bear what I say in mind, And when thy sleep departs forget it not." 4s He spake, and, disappearing, left the king Musing on things that never were to be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For on that very day he thought to take The city of Priam. Fool! who little knew What Jupiter designed should come to pass, 9 And little thought by his own act to bring Great woe and grief on Greeks and Trojans both In hard-fought battles. From his sleep he woke, The heavenly voice still sounding in his ears, And sat upright, and put his tunic on, ss Soft, fair, and new, and over that he cast His ample cloak, and round his shapely feet Laced the becoming sandals. Next, he hung Upon his shoulders and his side the sword With silver studs, and took into his hand *, The ancestral sceptre, old, but undecayed, And with it turned his footsteps toward the fleet Of the Achaian warriors brazen-mailed. Now Dawn, the goddess, climbed the Olympian height, Foretelling Day to Jupiter and all «s The immortal gods, when Agamemnon bade The shrill-voiced heralds call the long-haired Greeks Together; they proclaimed his will, and straight The warriors came in throngs. But first he bade A council of large-minded elders meet 70 On Pylian Nestor's royal bark, and there Laid his well-pondered thought before them thus :— "My friends, give ear: a Vision from above Came to me sleeping in the balmy night; Most like to noble Nestor was its look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its face, its stature, and its garb. It stood Beside me at my head, and thus it spake:— "' O warrior-son of Atreus, sleepest thou? Tamer of steeds! It ill becomes a chief, Who has the charge of nations and sustains &, Such mighty cares, to sleep the livelong night. Give earnest heed to me, for I am come A messenger from Jove, who, though far off, Takes part in thy concerns and pities thee. He bids thee arm, with all the array of war, ss The long-haired Greeks, for now the hour is come Which gives into thy hands the city of Troy With all its spacious streets. The powers who dwell In the celestial mansions are no more At variance ; Juno's prayers have moved them all, *, And o'er the Trojans hangs a fearful doom, Decreed by Jove. Bear what I say in mind.' "It spake and passed away, and with it fled My slumbers. Now must we devise a way To bring into the field the sons of Greece. 9s I first will try, as best I may, with words, And counsel flight from Troy with all our ships. Ye each, with different counsels, do your part." He spake, and took his seat, and after him Nestor, the king of sandy Pylus, rose, 10o With well-considered words. "O friends," he said, "Leaders and princes of the Grecian race, Had any other of the Argive host Related such a dream, we should have said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tale is false, and spurned the counsel given, ios But he has seen it who in rank and power Transcends us all, and ours it is to see How we may arm for war the sons of Greece." - He spake, and left the council, and the rest, All sceptred kings, arose, prepared to obey no The shepherd of the people. All the Greeks Meanwhile came thronging to the appointed place. As, swarming forth from cells within the rock, Coming and coming still, the tribe of bees Fly in a cluster o'er the flowers of spring, ns And some are darting out to right and left, So from the ships and tents a multitude Along the spacious beach, in mighty throngs, Moved toward the assembly. Rumor went with them, The messenger of Jove, and urged them on. m And now, when they were met, the place was stunned With clamor; earth, as the great crowd sat down, Groaned under them ; a din of mingled cries Arose; nine shouting heralds strove to hush The noisy crowd to silence, that at length i»s The heaven-descended monarchs might be heard. And when the crowd was seated and had paused From clamor, Agamemnon rose. He held The sceptre; Vulcan's skill had fashioned it, And Vulcan gave it to Saturnian Jove, 130 And Jove bestowed it on his messenger, The Argus-queller Hermes. He in turn Gave it to Pelops, great in horsemanship;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pelops passed the gift to Atreus next, The people's shepherd. Atreus, when he died, ,» Bequeathed it to Thyestes, rich in flocks; And last, Thyestes left it to be borne By Agamemnon, symbol of his rule O'er many isles and all the Argive realm. Leaning on this, he spake these winged words :— "Friends, Grecian heroes, ministers of Mars, ,v Saturnian Jove hath in an evil net Entangled me most cruelly. He gave His promise and his nod, that, having razed Troy with her strong defences, I should see us My home again; but now he meditates To wrong me, and commands me to return, With lessened glory and much people lost, To Argos. Thus hath it seemed good to Jove The mighty, who hath overthrown the towers •», Of many a city, and will yet o'erthrow. The ages yet to come will hear with shame That such a mighty army of the Greeks Have waged a fruitless war, and fought in vain A foe less numerous ; yet no end appears ,ss To this long strife. Should Greeks and Trojans make A treaty, faithfully to number each, And should the Trojans count their citizens, And we the Greeks, disposed in rows of tens, Should call the Trojans singly to pour out ,*, The wine for us, full many a company Of ten would lack its cup-bearer; so far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I judge, the sons of Greece outnumber those Who dwell in Troy. But they have yet allies From many a city, men who wield the spear, i«s Withstanding my attempt to overthrow That populous town. Nine years of mighty Jove Have passed already, and the planks that form Our barks are mouldering, and the cables drop In pieces, and our wives within their homes, 170 With their young children, sit expecting us; Yet is the enterprise for which we came Still unperformed. Now let us all obey The mandate I reveal, and hasten hence, With all our fleet, to our beloved homes; 17s For Troy with her broad streets we cannot take." He spake, and in the bosoms of the crowd Stirred every heart; even those who heard him not Were moved: the assembly wavered to and fro Like the long billows of the Icarian Sea, ,*) Roused by the East wind and the South, that rush Forth from the cloudy seat of Father Jove; Or like the harvest-field, when west winds stoop Suddenly from above, and toss the wheat. So was the whole assembly swayed; they ran •«s With tumult to the ships; beneath their feet Rose clouds of dust, and each exhorted each To seize the ships and drag them to the deep. They cleared the channels mid the clamorous cries Of multitudes, who hastened to return, 190 And drew the props from underneath their barks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then had the Greeks returned before their time If Juno had not to Minerva said : — "Unconquerable child of Jove! What change Is this? Shall then the Argive army thus m Flee to their homes across the deep and leave Glory to Priam, and to Ilium's sons The Argive Helen, for whose sake have died So many Greeks upon the Trojan strand, Far from the land they loved? But hasten thou *» To the host of Argive warriors mailed in brass, And with persuasive words restrain their men. Nor let them launch their barks upon the sea." She spake; nor did the blue-eyed Pallas fail To heed the mandate, but with quick descent »s She left the Olympian height and suddenly Stood by the swift ships of the Grecian host. She found Ulysses there, the man endowed With wisdom like to Jove's; he had not touched His well-appointed bark, for grief had seized ™ The hero's heart. The blue-eyed goddess took Her place beside him, and addressed him thus : — "Son of Laertes, nobly born and sage Ulysses, will ye, entering your good ships, Return in flight to your own land and leave »« Glory to Priam, and to Ilium's sons The Argive Helen, for whose sake have died So many Greeks upon the Trojan strand, Far from the land they loved? Go thou at once And seek the Argive warriors and restrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy persuasive words the impatient men, Nor let them launch their well-appointed ships." She spake; Ulysses knew the heavenly voice, And hastened back, and as he ran cast by His cloak. Eurybates of Ithaca, ™ The herald, caught it as he followed him. And now before Atrides, king of men, The warrior stood, and from his hand received The ancestral sceptre, old, but undecayed; And bearing this, he went among the ships Which brought the Achaian army, mailed in brass; And whomsoe'er he met upon his way, Monarch or eminent among the host, He stopped him, and addressed him blancily, thus : — "Good friend, this eager haste as if from fear *b Befits thee not. Sit down, and cause the rest To sit. Whit Agamemnon's will may be Thou canst not yet be certain; he intends To try the Greeks, and soon will punish those Who act amiss. We cannot all have heard m, What he has said ; beware, then, lest his wrath Fall heavily upon the sons of Greece. The monarch, foster-child of Jupiter, Is terrible enraged. Authority Is given by Jove, all-wise, who loves the king." »4s But when he found one of the lower sort Shouting and brawling, with the royal wand He smote him, and reproved him sharply, thus : — "Friend, take thy seat in quiet, and attend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To what thy betters say; thou art iot strong »s» Nor valiant, and thou art of ro^.an repute In combat and in council. We, the Greeks, Cannot be all supreme in power. The rule Of the many is not well. One must be chief In war, and one the king, to whom the son »ss Of Saturn gives the sceptre, making him The lawgiver, that he may rule the rest." Thus did he act the chief, and make the host Obey his word; they to the council ground Came rushing back from all the ships and tents »&, With tumult, as, on the long-stretching shore Of ocean many-voiced, his billows fling Themselves in fury, and the deep resounds. All others took their seats and kept their place; Thersites only, clamorous of tongue, »ss Kept brawling. He, with many insolent words, Was wont to seek unseemly strife with kings, Uttering whate'er it seemed to him might move The Greeks to laughter. Of the multitude Who came to Ilium, none so base as he, — »7° Squint-eyed, with one lame foot, and on his back A lump, and shoulders curving towards the chest; His head was sharp, and over it the hairs Were thinly scattered. Hateful to the chiefs Achilles and Ulysses, he would oft ™ Revile them. He to Agamemnon now Called with shrill voice and taunting words. The Greeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard him impatiently, with strong disgust And vehement anger, yet he shouted stiil To Agamemnon, and kept railing on : — "Of what dost thou complain ; what wouldst thou more, Atrides? In thy tents are heaps of gold; Thy tents are full of chosen damsels, given To thee before all others, by the Greeks, Whene'er we take a city. Dost thou yet *ss Hanker for gold, brought by some Trojan knight, A ransom for his son, whom I shall lead — I, or some other Greek — a captive bound? Or dost thou wish, for thy more idle hours, Some maiden, whom thou mayst detain apart? ,j0 111 it beseems a prince like thee to lead The sons of Greece, for such a cause as this, Into new perils. O ye coward race! Ye abject Greeklings, Greeks no longer, haste Homeward with all the fleet, and let us leave *>s This man at Troy to win his trophies here, That he may learn whether the aid we give Avails him aught or not, since he insults Achilles, a far braver man than he, And takes from him by force and holds his prize. And yet, Achilles is not moved by this *>, To anger: he is spiritless, or else, Atrides, this injustice were thy last." Taunting the shepherd of the people thus, Thersites shouted to the king of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But great Ulysses, coming quickly up, Rebuked him with a frown : "Thou garrulous wretch! Glib as thou art of tongue, Thersites, cease, Nor singly dare to seek dispute with kings. There came, I deem, no viler wretch than thou 310 To Troy with Agamemnon. Prate no more Of kings, reviling them, and keeping watch For pretexts to return. We know not yet Whether to go or to remain were best. Thou railest at the shepherd of the host, 31s Atrides Agamemnon, for thou seest The Grecian heroes load him with rewards, While thou insultest him with scurrilous words. I tell thee now, — and I shall keep my word, — If e'er again I find thee railing on, s*, As now thou dost, then let Ulysses wear His head no longer, let me not be called The father of Telemachus, if I Shall fail to seize thee, and to strip thee bare Of cloak and tunic, and whatever else 3»s Covers thy carcass, and to send thee forth. Howling, to our swift barks upon the shore, Scourged from the council with a storm of blows." He spake, and with his sceptre smote the back And shoulders of the scoffer, who crouched low w, And shed a shower of tears. A bloody whelk Rose where the golden sceptre fell. He took His seat, dismayed, and still in pain wiped off The tears from his smutched face. The multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him, though in anxious mood, were moved To smiles, and one addressed his neighbor thus :— "Strange that Ulysses does a thousand things iw So well, — so wise in council, and in war So brave; and for the Grecian army now He does the best of all, in silencing 3*, The chatter of this saucy slanderer, Whose acrid temper will not soon again Move him to rail with insolent speech at kings." So talked the multitude. Ulysses then, Holding the sceptre, rose, and by his side us The blue-eyed Pallas, iu a herald's form, Commanded silence, that the Argive host — The mightiest and the meanest— might attend To what should now be said, and calmly weigh The counsel given them. With a prudent art 3:0 Ulysses framed his speech, and thus he spake :— "The Greeks, O Atreus' son, would bring on thee Dishonor in the eyes and speech of men, Breaking the promise made when first they came From Argos, famed for steeds, that, having spoiled This well-defended Troy, thou shouldst return ss* A conqueror. And now, like tender boys Or widowed women, all give way to grief And languish to return. 'T were hard to bear If, after all our sufferings and our toils, 3&, We go back now. And yet, whoe'er remains A single month away from wife and home Chafes if the winter storms and angry sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Detain him stili on board his well-oared bark; And we have seen the ninth full year roll round 3«s Since we came hither. Therefore blame I not The Greeks if they in their beaked ships repine At this delay. But then it were disgrace To linger here so long and journey home With empty hands. Bear with us yet, and wait 37c Till it be certain whether Calchas speaks Truly or not. For we remember well, And all of you whom cruel death has spared Are witnesses with me, that when the ships Of Greece — it seems as if but yesterday —- 37s Mustered in Aulis on their way to bring Woe upon Priam and the town of Troy, And we, beside a fountain, offered up On sacred altars chosen hecatombs, Under a shapely plane-tree, from whose root js» Flowed the clear water, there appeared to us A wondrous sign. A frightful serpent, marked With crimson spots, which Jupiter sent forth To daylight from beneath the altar-stone, Came swiftly gliding toward the tree, whereon « A sparrow had her young — eight unfledged birds — Upon the topmost bough and screened by leaves; The mother was the ninth. The serpent seized The helpless brood and midst their piteous cries Devoured them, while the mother fluttered round, Lamenting, till he caught her by the wing; »« And when he had destroyed the parent bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all her brood, the god who sent him forth Made him a greater marvel still. The son Of crafty Saturn changed the snake to stone; m And we who stood around were sore amazed. Such was the awful portent which the gods Showed at that sacrifice. But Calchas thus Instantly spake, interpreting the sign :— "'O long haired Greeks,' he said, ' why stand ye thus 4» In silence? All-foreseeing Jupiter Hath sent this mighty omen; late it comes And late will be fulfilled, yet gloriously, And with a fame that never shall decay. For as the snake devoured the sparrow's brood, «s Eight nestlings, and the mother-bird the ninth, — So many years the war shall last; the tenth Shall give into our hands the stately Troy.' "So spake the seer; thus far his words are true. Bide ye then here, ye well-greaved sons of Greece, Until the city of Priam shall be ours." 4n He spake, and loud applause thereon ensued From all the Greeks, and fearfully the ships Rang with the clamorous voices uttering The praises of Ulysses and his words. 41s Then Nestor, the Gerenian knight, arose And thus addressed them: "Strangely ye behave, Like boys unwonted to the tasks of war. Where now are all your promises and oaths? Shall all our councillings and all our cares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leagues made with wine, religiously outpoured, And plightings of the strong right hand, be cast Into the flames? Idly we keep alive A strife of words, which serv es no end though long We loiter here! But thou, Atrides, firm «s Of purpose, give command that now the Greeks Move to the war, and leave to meet their fate Those — one or more — who, parting from our host, Meditate—but I deem in vain — to flee Homeward to Argos ere they are assured Whether the word of Jove omnipotent Be false or true. For when the Greeks embarked In their swift ships, to carry death and fate To Ilium's sons, almighty Jupiter Flung down his lightnings on the right and gave «s Propitious omens. Therefore let no Greek Go home till he possess a Trojan wife And ye have signally avenged the wrongs And griefs of Helen. Yet, if one be here Who longs to go, let him but lay his hand 4*. On his black ship, prepared to cross the deep, And he shall die before the rest. But thou, O king, be wisely counselled, lend an ear To others, nor neglect what I propose. Marshal the Greeks by tribes and brotherhoods, 4« That tribe may stand by tribe, and brotherhoods Succor each other; if thou thus command And they obey, thou shalt discern which chief Or soldier is faint-hearted, which is brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For each will fight his best, and thou shalt know 4s» Whether through favor of the gods to Troy, Or our own cowardice and shameful lack Of skill in war, the town is not o'erthrown." In turn the monarch Agamemnon spake : — "O aged warrior, thou excellest all jss The Greeks in council. Would to Jupiter, To Pallas and Apollo, that with me There were but ten such comrades. Priam's town Would quickly fall before us and be made A desolation. But the god who bears 4«• The aegis, Saturn's son, hath cast on me Much grief, entangling me in idle strifes And angry broils. Achilles and myself Have quarrelled for a maid with bitter words, And I was first incensed. But if again We meet and act as friends, the overthrow That threatens Ilium will not be delayed,— Not for an hour. Now all to your repast! And then prepare for battle. First let each See that his spear be sharp, and put his shield 470 In order, give to his swift-footed steeds Their ample forage, and o'erlook his car That it be strong for war ; for all the day Shall we maintain the stubborn fight, nor cease Even for a moment, till the night come down «, To part the wrathful combatants. The band Of each broad buckler shall be moist with sweat On every breast, and weary every arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wields the spear, and every horse that drags The polished chariot o'er the field shall smoke 4&, With sweat. But whosoever shall be found By the beaked ships and skulking from the fray Shall be the feast of birds of prey and dogs!" He spake; the Argives raised a mighty shout, Loud as when billows lash the beetling shore, Rolled by the south-wind toward some jutting rock On which the waves, whatever wind may blow, Beat ceaselessly. In haste the people rose And went among the ships, and kindled fires Within their tents and took their meal. And one Made offerings to one god; another paid w Vows to another of the immortal race; And all implored deliverance from death And danger. Agamemnon, king of men, Offered a fatted ox of five years old 49s To Jupiter Almighty, summoning The elder princes of the Grecian host, — Nestor the first, the king Idomeneus, And then the warriors Ajax and the son Of Tydeus, with Ulysses, like to Jove s*, In council, sixth and last. Unbidden came The valiant Menelaus, for he knew The cares that weighed upon his brother's heart. Then, as they stood around the fatted ox And took in hand the salted barley-meal, s0s King Agamemnon in the circle prayed : — "O Jove, most great.and glorious I who dost rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tempest, — dweller of the ethereal space! Let not the sun go down and night come on Ere I shall lay the halls of Priam waste s10 With fire, and give their portals to the flames, And hew away the coat of mail that shields The breast of Hector, splitting it with steel. And may his fellow-warriors, many a one, Fall round him to the earth and bite the dust." s1s He spake; the son of Saturn hearkened not, But took the sacrifice and made more hard The toils of war. And now when they had prayed, And strown the salted meal, they drew the neck Of the victim back and cufthe throat and flayed s~ The carcass, hewed away the thighs and laid The fat upon them in a double fold, On which they placed raw strips of flesh, and these They burned with leafless billets. Then they fixed The entrails on the spits and held them forth s,s Above the flames, and when the thighs were burned And entrails tasted, all the rest was carved Into small portions and transfixed with spits And roasted carefully and drawn away. And when these tasks were finished and the board Was spread, they feasted ; from that equal feast s31 None went unsated. When they had appeased Their thirst and hunger, the Gerenian knight Nestor stood forth and spake: "Most glorious son Of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men! s3s Waste we no time in prattle, nor delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The work appointed by the gods, but send The heralds of the Achaians, brazen-mailed, To call the people to the fleet, while we Pass in a body through their vast array w0 And wake the martial spirit in their breasts." He spake, and Agamemnon, king of men, Followed the counsel. Instantly he bade The loud-voiced herald summon to the war The long-haired Argives. At the call they came, ms Quickly they came together, and the kings, Nurslings of Jupiter, who stood beside Atrides, hastened through the crowd to form The army into ranks. Among them walked The blue-eyed Pallas, bearing on her arm ss0 The priceless aegis, ever fair and new, And undecaying; from its edge there hung A hundred golden fringes, fairly wrought, And every fringe might buy a hecatomb. With this and fierce, defiant looks she passed ss Through all the Achaian host, and made their hearts Impatient for the march and strong to endure The combat without pause, — for now the war Seemed to them dearer than the wished return, In their good galleys, to the land they loved. *, As when a forest on the mountain-top Is in a blaze with the devouring flame And shines afar, so, while the warriors marched, The brightness of their burnished weapons flashed On every side and upward to the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when water-fowl of many tribes — Geese, cranes, and long-necked swans — disport themselves In Asia's fields beside Cayster's streams, And to and fro they fly with screams, and light, Flock after flock, and all the fields resound; s» So poured, from ships and tents, the swarmmg tribes Into Scamander's plain, where fearful'y Earth echoed to the tramp of steeds and men; And there they mustered on the river's side, Numberless as the flowers and leaves of spring, ks And as when flies in swarming myriads haunt The herdsman's stalls in spring-time, when new milk Has filled the pails, — in such vast multitudes Mustered the long-haired Greeks upon the plain, Impatient to destroy the Trojan race. Then, as the goatherds, when their mingled flocks Are in the pastures, know and set apart Each his own scattered charge, so did the chiefs, Moving among them, marshal each his men. There walked King Agamemnon, like to Jove s's In eye and forehead, with the loins of Mars, And ample chest like him who rules the sea. And as a bull amid the horned herd Stands eminent and nobler than the rest, So Jove to Agamemnon on that day s90 Gave to surpass the chiefs in port and mien. O Muses, goddesses who dwell on high, Tell me, — for all things ye behold and know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While we know nothing and may only hear The random tales of rumor, — tell me who Were chiefs and princes of the Greeks; for I Should fail to number and to name them all, — Had I ten tongues, ten throats, a voice unapt To weary, uttered from a heart of brass, — Unless the Muses aided me. I now Will sing of the commanders and the ships. Peneleus, Prothoenor, Leitus, And Clonius, and Arcesilaus led The warriors of Boeotia, all who dwelt In Hyria and in rocky Aulis, all From Schoenus and from Scolus and the hill Of Eteonus and Thespeia's fields, And Graia and the Mycalesian plain, All who from Herma and Ilesius came, And Erythrae, and those who had their homes In Eleon, Hyla, and Ocalea, And Peteona, and the stately streets Of Medeon, Copae, Thisbe full of doves, And those whose dwelling-place was Eutresis, And Coronaea, and the grassy lawns Of Haliartus, all the men who held Plataea, or in Glissa tilled the soil, Or dwelt in Hypothebae nobly built, Or in Onchestus with its temple-walls Sacred to Neptune, or inhabited Arne with fruitful vineyards, Midea And Nyssa the divine, and Anthedon vcu i.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The distant, — fifty were their barks, and each Held sixscore youths of the Boeotian race. Next, over those who came from Aspledon And from Orchomenus in Minyas Ascalaphus ruled with his brother chief Ialmenus, — two sons of mighty Mars. These, in the halls of Actor, Azis' son, Astyoche bore to the god of war, *,p Who met by stealth the bashful maid, as once She sought the upper palace-rooms. Their ships Were thirty, ranged in order on the shore. Then Schedius and Epistrophus, two chiefs Born to Iphitus, son of Naubolus '3s The large of soul, led the Phocean host, Those who in Cyparissus had their homes, In Panope and Crissa the divine And Daulis, or about Hyampolis Anemoreia, and upon the banks Of broad Cephissus, and with them the race Who held Lilaea by Cephissus' springs. With these came forty ships. Their leaders went Among them, ranging them in due array And close to the Boeotians on the left. «»s Ajax the swift of foot, Oileus' son, Was leader of the Locrians, — less in limb And stature than the other Ajax, — nay, Much smaller than that son of Telamon, Wearing a linen corselet; but to wield «s» The spear he far excelled all other men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hellas and Achaia. Those who dwelt In Cynus, Opus, Bessa, and the fields Of Scarpha and Calliarus and green Augeia, Tarpha, and the meadows where «ss Boagrius waters Thronium, followed him With forty dark-hulled Locrian barks, that came From coasts beyond Eubrea's sacred isle. The Euboeans breathing valor, they who held Chalets, Eretria, and the vineyard slopes w0 Of Histiaea, and the lofty walls Of Dium and Cerinthus by the sea, And Styra, and Earystus; these obeyed Elphenor of the line of Mars, and son Of the large-souled Chalcodon ruler o'er «s The Abantes. Him with loosely flowing locks The Abantes followed, swift of foot and fierce In combat, and expert to break the mail Upon the enemies' breasts with ashen spears; With forty dark-hulled barks they followed him. «7» Next they who came from Athens nobly built, The city of Erechthe'us, great of soul, Son of the teeming Earth, whom Pallas reared, That daughter of the Highest, and within Her sumptuous temple placed him, where the sons Of Athens, with the circling year's return, s7« Paid worship at her altars, bringmg bulls And lambs to lay upon them; these obeyed Menestheus, son of Peteus, whom no chief On earth could equal in the art to place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Squadrons of men and horse in due array For battle. Nestor only sought to share This praise, but Nestor was the elder chief. Fifty dark galleys with Menestheus came. Ajax had brought twelve ships from Salamis, «es And these he stationed near the Athenian host. But they who dwelt in Argos, or within The strong-walled Tiryns, or Hermione And Asine with their deep, sheltering bays, Troezene and Eionae, and hills ,*, Of Epidaurus planted o'er with vines, And they who tilled -£igina and the coast Of Mases, — Grecian warriors, — over these Brave Diomed bore sway, with Sthenelus, Beloved son of far-famed Campaneus, ,*s And, third in rule, Euryalus, who seemed Like to a god, Mecisteus' royal son Who sprung from Talaus; yet the chief command Was given to Diomed, the great in war. A fleet of eighty galleys came with them. 700 The dwellers of Mycenae nobly built, Of Corinth famed for riches, and the town Of beautiful Cleonae, they who tilled Orneia, Araethyrea's pleasant land, And Sicyon, where of yore Adrastus reigned, m And Hyperesia and the airy heights Of Gonoessa, and Pellene's fields, And they who came from /Egium and the shores Around it, and broad lands of Helice,—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These had a hundred barks, and over them i«, Atrides Agamemnon bore command; And with him came the largest train of troops And bravest. He was cased in gleaming mail, And his heart gloried when he thought how high He stood among the heroes, —mightier far 7•1 In power, and leader of a mightier host. Then they who dwelt within the hollow vale Of queenly Lacedsemon, they who held Phare and Sparta, Messa full of doves, Bryseire, and Augeia's rich domain, 7*, Amyclae and the town of Helos, built Close to the sea, and those who had their homes In Laiis and the fields of CEtylus; All these obeyed the brother of the king, The valiant Menelaus. Sixty ships m They brought, but these he ranged apart from those Of Agamemnon. Through the ranks he went, And, trusting in his valor, quickened theirs For battle; for his heart within him burned To avenge the wrongs of Helen and her tears. 73" Then came the men who tilled the Pylean coast And sweet Arene, Thrya at the fords Of Alpheus, and the stately palace homes Of ^Epy, or in Cyparissus dwelt, Or in Amphigeneia, Pteleum, ns Helos and Dorium, where the Muses once Met, journeying from CEcalian Eurytus, The Thracian Thamyris, and took from him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His power of voice. For he had made his boast To overcome in song the daughters nine 740 Of Jove the /Egis-bearer. They in wrath Smote him with blindness, took the heavenly gift Of song away, and made his hand forget Its cunning with the harp. All those were led By Nestor, the Gerenian knight, who came 74s To war on Troy with fourscore ships and ten. The Arcadians, dwelling by the lofty mount Cyllene, near the tomb of Epytus, Warriors who combat hand to hand, and they Who tilled the fields of Pheneus and possessed 730 Orchomenus with all its flocks, or dwelt In Ripa and in Stratia, and the bleak Enispe, beaten with perpetual winds, And in Tegea, and the lovely land Of Mantinea, and in Stymphalus 7ss And in Parrhasia, came in sixty ships To Troy, with Agapenor for their chief, Son of Ancaeus. Every ship was thronged With warriors of Arcadia, for the king Of men, Atrides, gave them well-oared barks 7* To cross the dark blue deep, since not to them Pertained the cares and labors of the sea. Then from Buprasium and the sacred coast Of Elis, from Hyrmine and remote Myrsinus and the Olenian precipice, 7«s And from Alisium came, with chieftains four, The warriors, ten swift galleys following</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each chieftain, crowded with Epean troops. And part obeyed Amphimacus, the son Of Cteatus, and part with Thalpius came, 770 The son of Eurytus Actorides, And part with brave Diores, of the line Of Amarynceus. Last, Polyxenus, The godlike offspring of Agasthenes, Whose father was Augeias, led the rest. 77s They from Dulichium and the Echinades, Those holy isles descried from Elis o'er The waters, had for leader Megas, brave As Mars, — the son of Phyleus, dearly loved By Jove. He left his father's house in wrath 7* And dwelt within Dulichium. With the troops Of Megas came a fleet of forty ships. Ulysses led the Cephallenian men, Who dwelt in Ithaca, or whose abode Was leafy Neritus, and those who came 7«s From Crocyleia, and from /Egilips The craggy, and Zacynthus, and the isle Of Samos, and Epirus, and from all The bordering lands. O'er these Ulysses ruled, A chief like Jove in council, and with him 790 There came twelve galleys with their scarlet prows. Then with the ^Etolians came Andraemon's son Thoas, their leader. With him were the men Of Pleuron and Pylcne, Olenus, And Chalcis on the sea-coast and the rocks m Of Calydon ; for now no more the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of large-souled CEneus were alive on earth, Nor lived the chief himself, and in his tomb Was Meleager of the golden hair; And thus the /Etolian rule to Thoas came. &» A fleet of fourscore galleys followed him. Idomeneus, expert to wield the spear, Commanded those of Crete, the men who dwelt In Cnosus or Gortyna, strongly walled Lyctus, Miletus, and the glimmering ••« Lycastus, Phaestus, Rhytium's populous town, And all the warrior train inhabiting The hundred towns of Crete. Idomeneus The mighty spearman, and Meriones, Fierce as the god of war, commanded these, »» And came to Troy with eighty dark-ribbed barks. Tlepolemus, a warrior of the stock Of Hercules, was leader of the troops Of Rhodes, and brought nine vessels to the war, Manned with the haughty Rhodians. These were ranged as In threefold order: those of Lindus, those Who dwell in white Camirus, lastly those Of lalassa. These Tlepolemus, The valiant spearman, ruled. Astyoche Bore him to mighty Hercules, who led &» The maid from Ephyra, upon the banks Of Selleis, to be his wife, what time His valor had o'erthrown and made a spoil Of many a city full of noble youths.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tlepolemus, when in the palace-halls He grew to manhood, slew an aged man, An uncle of his father, whom he loved, Lycimnius, of the line of Mars, and straight He rigged a fleet of ships and led on board A numerous host and fled across the sea. For fearful were the threats of other sons And grandsons of the mighty Hercules. In Rhodes they landed after wanderings long And many hardships. There they dwelt in tribes, Three tribes, —and were beloved of Jupiter, The ruler over gods and men, who poured Abundant riches on their new abode. Nireus with three good ships from Syma came, Nireus, Aglaia's son by Charopus The monarch, — Nireus who in comeliness Surpassed all Greeks that came to Ilium, save The faultless son-of Peleus. Yet was he Unwarlike and few people followed him. The dwellers of Nisyrus, Crapathus, And Cos, the city of Eurypylus, Casus, and the Calydnian isles, obeyed Phidippus and his brother Antiphus, Sons of the monarch Thessalus, who sprang From Hercules. With thirty ships they came. But those who held Pelasgian Argos, those Who dwelt in Alos, Trachys, Alope, l'hthia, and Hellas full of lovely dames, — Named Myrmidons, Achaians, Hellenes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles led their fifty ships; but they Now heeded not the summons to the war, «s$ For there was none to form their ranks for fight. The great Achilles, swift of foot, remained Within his ships, indignant for the sake Of the fair-haired Briscis, whom he brought A captive from Lyrnessus after toils «43 And dangers many. He had sacked and spoiled Lyrnessus, and o'crthrown the walls of Thebes And smitten Mynes and Epistrophus, The warlike sons of King Evenus, sprung From old Selapius. For this cause he kept «s Within his ships, full soon to issue forth. The men of Phylace, of Pyrasus, — Sacred to Ceres and o'erspread with flowers, And of Itona, mother of white flocks, Antrona on the sea, and Pteleum green *t0 With herbage, — over these while yet he lived The brave Protesilaus ruled; but now The dark earth covered him, and for his sake His consort, desolate in Phylace, Tore her fair cheeks, and all unfinished stood «7s His palace, for a Dardan warrior slew Her husband as he leaped upon the land, The foremost of the Achaians. Yet his troops Were not without a leader, though they mourned Their brave old chief. Podarces, loved by Mars, — Son of Iphiclus, rich in flocks, who sprang ssi From Phylacus, — led them and formed their ranks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A younger brother of the slain was he. The slain was braver. Though the warriors grieved To lose their glorious chief, they did not lack *s A general. Forty dark ships followed him. Then they who dwelt in Phera:, by the lake Boebeis, and in Boebe, Glaphyrcc, And nobly built Iolchos, came to Troy, Filling eleven galleys, and obeyed **, Eumelus, whom Alcestis the divine Bore to Admetus, — fairest, she, of all The house of Pelias and of womankind. Those from Methone and Olizon's rocks, And Meliboea and Thaumacia, filled «9s Seven ships, with Philoctetes for their chief, A warrior skilled to bend the bow. Each bark Held fifty rowers, bowmen all, and armed For stubborn battle. But their leader lay Far in an island, suffering grievous pangs, — 990 The hallowed isle of Lemnos. There the Greeks Left him, in torture from a venomed wound Made by a serpent's fangs. He lay and pined. Yet was the moment near when they who thus Forsook their king should think of him again. w Meantime his troops were not without a chief; Though greatly they desired their ancient lord, For now the base-born Medon marshalled them, Son of Oileus. Rhene brought him forth To that destroyer of strong fortresses. 910 The men of Tricca and Ithome's hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they who held CEchalia and the town Of Eurytus the (Echalian, had for chiefs Two sons of ^Esculapius, healers both, And skilful, — Podalirius one, and one 91s Machaon. Thirty hollow barks were theirs. The dwellers of Ormenium, they whose homes Were by the Hyperian fount, and they Who held Asterium and the snowy peaks Of Titanus, obeyed Eurypylus, 9o0 Evaemon's son, and far renowned. A fleet Of forty dark-ribbed vessels followed him. Those who possessed Argissa, those who held Gyrtone, Orthe, and Helone, those Who dwelt in Oloosson with white walls, ^s The sturdy warrior Polypoetes led, Son of Pirithous, who derived his birth From deathless Jove. Hippodameia bore The warrior to Pirithous on the day When he took vengeance on the shaggy brood w Of Centaurs, and from Pelion drove them forth To ^Ethica?. Yet not alone in rule Was Polypoetes, for Leonteus, sprung From the large-souled Coronus, Caeneus' son, Shared with him the command. With them a fleet Of forty dark-hulled vessels came to Troy. 936 Then Guneus came, with two and twenty ships From Cythus. Under his command he held The Enienes, and that sturdy race, The Periboean warriors, and the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who built on cold Dodona, or who tilled The fields where pleasant Titaresius flows And into Peneus pours his gentle stream, Yet with its silver eddies mingles not, But floats upon the current's face like oil, — 949 A Stygian stream by which the immortals swear. With Prothous, Tenthredon's son, there came The warriors of Magnesia, who.abode By Peneus, and by Pelion hung with woods; Swift-footed Prothous led these. They came 9s0 With forty dark-hulled galleys to the war. These were the chiefs and princes of the Greeks. Say, Muse, who most excelled among the kings, And which the noblest steeds, of all that came With the two sons of Atreus to the war? 9ss The noblest steeds were those in Pherae bred, That, guided by Eumelus, flew like birds, — Alike in hue and age; the plummet showed Their height the same, and both were mares, and, reared By Phoebus of the silver bow among 9«0 The meadows of Pieria, they became The terror of the bloody battle-field. The mightiest of the chiefs, while yet in wrath Achilles kept aloof, was Ajax, son Of Telamon ; yet was Pelides far The greater warrior, and the steeds which bore That perfect hero were of noblest breed. In his beaked galleys, swift to cut the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles lay, meanwhile, and nursed the wrath He bore td Agamemnon, Atreus' son, wo The shepherd of the people. On the beach His warriors took their sport with javelins And quoits and bows, while near the chariots tied The horses, standing, browsed on lotus-leaves And parsley from the marshes. But beneath 97s The tents the closely covered chariots stood, While idly through the camp the charioteers, Hither and thither sauntering, missed the sight Of their brave lord and went not to the field. The army swept the earth as when a fire 5«0 Devours the herbage of the plains. The ground Groaned under them as when the Thunderer Jove In anger with his lightnings smites the earth About Typhosus—where they say he lies — In Arimi. So fearfully the ground * Groaned under that swift army as it moved. Now to the Trojans the swift Iris came A messenger from aegis-bearing Jove, Tidings of bale she brought. They all had met — Old men and youths — in council at the gates 990 Of Priam's mansion. There did Iris take Her station near the multitude, and spake, In voice and gesture like Polites, son Of Priam, who, confiding in his speed, Had stood a watcher for the sons of Troy 99s On aged /Esyeta's lofty tomb, To give them warning when the Achaian host

Page 63
Book II. 63 Should issue from their galleys. Thus disguised, Swift Iris spake her message from the skies : — "Father! thou art delighted with much speech, As once in time of peace, but now't is war, «», Inevitable war, and close at hand. I have seen many battles, yet have ne'er Beheld such armies, and so vast as these, — In number like the sands and summer leaves. «»s They march across the plain, prepared to give Battle beneath the city walls. To thee, O Hector, it belongs to heed my voice And counsel. Many are the allies within The walls of this great town of Priam, men ion Of diverse race and speech. Let every chief Of these array his countrymen for war, And give them orders for the roming fight." She spake, and Hector heeded and obeyed The counsel of the goddess; he dismissed ,o,-s The assembly ; all the Trojans rushed to arms, And all the gates were opened. Horse and foot Poured forth together in tumultuous haste. In the great plain before the city stands A mound of steep ascent on every side; 102c, Men named it Batiea, but the gods Called it the swift Myrinna's tomb; and here Mustered the sons of Troy and their allies. Great Hector of the beamy helm, the son Of Priam, led the Trojan race. The host '»•s Of greatest multitude was marshalled there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there the bravest, mighty with the spear. /Eneas marshalled the Dardanian troops, — The brave son of Anchises. Venus bore The warrior to Anchises on the heights ,030 Of Ida, where the mortal lover met The goddess. Yet he ruled them not alone; Two chiefs, Antenor's sons Archelochus And Acamas, were with him in command, Expert in all the many arts of war. i03s The Trojans from Zeleia, opulent men, Who drank the dark ^isepus, — over these Ruled Pandarus, Lycaon*s valiant son, To whom the god Apollo gave his bow. The troops from Adrasteia, they who dwelt i»*, Within Apaesus' walls, or tilled the soil Of Pityeia and Tereia's heights, Were led by Amphius and Adrastus, clad In linen corselets for the war, the sons Of Merops the Percosian, skilled beyond »,« All other men in the diviner's art. Nor would he that his sons should seek the field Of slaughter. They obeyed him not; the fates Decreed their early death and urged them on. The dwellers of Percote, Practium, 1»s0 And Sestus, and Abydus, and divine Arisba, followed Asius, great among The heroes and the son of Hyrtacus, — Asius, who came with strong and fiery steeds, Borne from Arisba and from Selleis' banks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hippothoiis over the Pelasgian tribes — Skilled spearman, who abode among the fields Of the deep-soiled Larissa — bore command, — Hippothoiis with Pyteus, who derived Their race from Mars, and for their father claimed Pelasgian Lethus, son of Teutamus. »,*, And Acamas, and Peiroiis, valiant chief, Were captains of the Thracian men, whose fields Were bounded by the rushing Hellespont. Euphemus led the Cicones, expert k*s To wield the spear in fight. The nobly-born Troezenus was his father. Ceas' son Pyraechmes with Paeonia's archers came From the broad Axius in far Amydon,— Axius, the fairest river of the earth. io7o Pytamenes, a chief of fearless heart, Led from the region of the Eneti, Where first the stubborn race of mules was bred, The Paphlagonian warriors, they who held Cytorus, Sesamus, and fair abodes "to Built where Parthenius wanders on, and those Who dwelt in Cromna and ^Egialus, And on the lofty Erythinian heights. And Hodius and Epistrophus led on The Halezonians from the distant land iceo Of Alyba, where ores of silver lie. And Chromis and the augur Ennomus Were leaders of the Mysians; but his skill Saved not the augur from the doom of death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by the swift of foot, /Eacides, ,,*s With other men of Troy where Xanthus flows. And Phorcys and Ascanius, who was like A god in beauty, led the Phrygian troops From far Ascania, eager for the fray. And Antiphus and Mesthles were the chiefs ,0*, Of the Maeonian warriors, reared beside The ships of Tmolus. There Gygaea's lake Brought forth both chieftains to Pylsemenes. Nastes was leader of the Carian troops, Who spake in barbarous accents and possessed «m Miletus and the leafy mountain heights Where dwell the Phthirians,and Marauder's stream, And airy peaks of Mycale. O'er these Amphimachus and Nastes held command, — Amphimachus and Nastes, far renowned u» Sons of Nomion, him who, madly vain, Went to the battle pranked like a young girl In golden ornaments. They spared him not The bitter doom of death; he fell beneath The hand of swift /Eacides within n0s The river's channel. There the great in war, Achilles, spoiled Nomion of his gold. Sarpedon and the noble Glaucus bore Rule o'er the Eycians coming from afar, Whereeddying Xanthus runs through Eycia's rr.eads.</span>
				</p>
				</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>