<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle"></span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-9" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<p>
				<span>THE Trojans thus kept watch ; while through JL the night The power of Flight, companion of cold Fear, Wrought on the Greeks, and all their bravest men Were bowed beneath a sorrow hard to bear. The north wind and the west, that suddenly Blow from the Thracian coast; the black waves rise At once, and fling the sea-weed to the shore, —Thus were the Achaians troubled in their hearts. Atrides, deeply grieving, walked the camp, ,» And bade the clear-voiced heralds call by name To council all the chiefs, but not aloud. The king himself among the foremost gave The summons. Sadly that assembly took Their seats ; and Agamemnon in the midst is Rose, shedding tears, — as down a lofty rock, Darkening its face, a fountain's waters flow, — And, deeply sighing, thus addressed the Greeks :— "O friends! the chiefs and princes of the Greeks 1 Saturnian Jove hath in an evil snare *, Most cruelly entangled me. He gave His promise once that I should overthrow This strong-walled Ilium, and return; but now He meditates a fraud, and sends me back To Argos without glory, and with loss 3s Of many warriors. Thus doth it seem good Doubtless to Jove Almighty, who hath cast The towers of many a city down to earth, And will cast others down, — his might excels All other might. But let us now obey, *, As I shall counsel you, and in our ships Haste to our own dear country; for I see That Troy with its broad streets can ne'er be ours." He spake; and all were silent. Silent long Remained the sorrow-stricken sons of Greece, ss Till Diomed, the brave in battle, spake :— "First of the chiefs I speak, to disapprove,

Page 222
222 The Iliad. Atrides, thy rash purpose: 't is my right In council ; nor, O king, be thou displeased. Thou first among the Greeks hast taunted me « With lack of valor, calling me unapt For war and weak of arm. The young and old Have heard the taunt. One of two gifts the son Of wily Saturn hath bestowed on thee: High rank and rule o'er all the rest he gave, « But gave thee not the nobler quality Of fortitude. Dost thou then truly deem The Greeks unapt for war and weak of arm, As thou hast said? Thou longest to return: Go, then ; the way is open; by the sea s0 The barks that brought thee from Mycenae lie, A numerous fleet. Yet others will remain — Long haired Achaians — till we overthrow The city. Should they also pine for home, Then let them flee, with all their ships ; while I ss With Sthenelus fight on until we make An end of Troy, — for with the gods we came." He spake. The Greeks applauded; all admired The words of the horse-tamer Diomed. Nestor the knight then rose, and thus he spake :— "O son of Tydeus, eminently brave « Art thou among thy comrades in the field, And great in council. No one here condemns The sentence thou hast given ; among the Greeks Is no one who denies what thou hast said; Yet hast thou not said all. Thy years are few, —

Page 223
Book IX. 223 So few, thou mightest be my youngest son; And yet thou speakest wisely to the kings Of Greece, and thy discourse is just and right. Now I, who boast of far more years than thou, r, Will speak of this that yet remains, and none — Not even Agamemnon — will gainsay What I advise. A wretch without a tie Of kin, a lawless man without a home, Is he who takes delight in civil .strifes. 7s But let us now give way to the dark night, And make our banquets ready. Let the guards Lie down within the trenches which we digged Without the wall: be this the young men's charge. And thou, Atrides, do thou now begin, a, Who art supreme, and make a feast for all The elder chiefs; it shall become thee well: Thy tents are full of wine, which ships from Thrace Bring every day across the mighty deep, And thou hast all things ready, and a host ss Of menials. Then, when many throng the board, Thou shalt defer to him who counsels thee Most wisely ; for the Greeks have urgent need Of prudent counsels, when the foe so close Beside our galleys lights his multitude 90 Of watch-fires. Who that sees them can rejoice r This night will rescue or destroy our host." He spake. They listened all, and willingly Obeyed him. Forth in armor went the guards, Led by the chieftain Thrasymedes, son »s

Page 224
224 The Iliad. Of Nestor, by Ascalaphus, who claimed His birth from Mars, and by Ialmenus His brother, and Deipyrus, with whom There followed Aphareus, Meriones, And Lycomedes, Creon's noble son. 1«, Seven were the leaders of the guards; with each A hundred youths in warlike order marched, Bearing long spears; and when they reached the space Between the trench and wall they sat them down, And kindled fires and made their evening meal. tos Atrides brought the assembled elder chiefs To his pavilion, and before them set A generous banquet. They put forth their hands And shared the feast; and when the calls of thirst And hunger ceased, the aged Nestor first »o Began to counsel them ; the chief, whose words Had lately seemed of wisest import, now Addressed the assembly with well-ordered speech: — "Atrides Agamemnon, glorious king! What I shall say begins and ends with thee, 11s For thou dost rule o'er many nations. Jove Hath given to thee the sceptre, and the power To make their laws, that thou mayst seek their good. Thou, therefore, of all men, shouldst speak and hear In council, and shouldst follow willingly «° Another's judgment when it best promotes The general weal; for all depends on thee. Now let me say what seems to me most wise;

Page 225
Book IX. 225 For better counsel none can give than this Which now I meditate, and which to give «s I purposed from the hour when thou, great king, Didst bear the maid Briseis from the tent Of the enraged Achilles, unapproved By me, who strove to change thy rash design. Then didst thou yield thee to thy haughty will, 130 And didst dishonor a most valiant man, Whom the immortals honor. Thou didst take And still dost keep the prize he fairly won. Let it be now our study to appease The hero with large gifts and soothing words." Then Agamemnon, king of men, replied :— "O ancient man, most truly hast thou named My faults. I erred, and I deny it not. That man indeed is equal to a host Whom Jupiter doth love and honor thus, ,*, Humbling the Achaian people for his sake. And now, since, yielding to my wayward mood I erred, let me appease him', if I may, With gifts of priceless worth. Before you all I number them, — seven tripods which the fire us Hath never touched, six talents of pure gold, And twenty shining caldrons, and twelve steeds Of hardy frame, victorious in the race, Whose feet have won me prizes in the games. No beggar would he be, nor yet with store Of gold unfurnished, in whose coffers lay The prizes those swift steeds have brought to me. 10 • o

Page 226
226 The Iliad. Seven faultless women, skilled in household arts, I give moreover, — Lesbians, whom I chose When he o'erran the populous Lesbian isle, — ,ss Damsels in beauty who excel their sex. These I bestow, and with them I will send Her whom I took away, — Briseis, pure — I swear it with a mighty oath — as pure As when she left his tent. All these I give ,&, At once ; and if by favor of the gods We lay the mighty city of Priam waste, He shall load down his galley with large store Of gold and silver, entering first when we, The Greeks, divide the spoil. Then may he choose Twice ten young Trojan women, beautiful «s« Beyond their sex save Helen. If we come Safe to Achaian Argos, richly stocked With milky kine, he may become to me A son-in-law, and cherished equally 170 With my sole son Orestes, who is reared Most royally. Three daughters there, within My stately palace-walls, — Chrysothemis, Laodice, and Iphianassa, — dwell, And he may choose among them, and may lead ,n Home to the house of Peleus her who best Deserves his love. Nor need he to endow The bride, for I will give an ampler dower Than ever father to his daughter gave, — Seven cities with thronged streets, —Cardamyle, •*, Enope, grassy Hira, Pherae famed

Page 227
Book IX. Afar, Antheia with rich pasture-fields, /Epeia beautiful, and Pedasus With all its vineyards; all are near the sea, And stand the last before you reach the coast Of sandy Pylos. Rich in flocks and herds Their dwellers are, and they will honor him As if he were a god, and, ruled by him, Will pay large tribute. These will I bestow, Let but his anger cool and his resolve Give way. 'T is Pluto who is deaf to prayer And ne'er relents, and he, of all the gods, Most hateful is to men. Now let the son Of Peleus yield at length to me, who stand Above him in authority and years." Then answered Nestor the Gerenian knight: - "Atrides Agamemnon! glorious king! Gifts not to be contemned thou offerest To Prince Achilles. Let us now despatch A chosen embassy, who shall proceed At once to where Pelides holds his tent . I name the men ; and cheerfully will they Perform the duty: Phoenix, dear to Jove, Shall be their leader, mighty Ajax next, And then high-born Ulysses; heralds twain Shall follow, — Hodius and Eurybates. And now be water brought to cleanse our hands, And charge be given that no ill-omened word Be uttered, while we pray that Jupiter, The son of Saturn, will assist our need."

Page 228
228 The Iliad. He spake; and all approved the words he said. Then poured the heralds water on the hands Of those who sat. The young men crowned with wine The goblets, and in seemly order passed The brimming cups, distributing to each. «s Part to the gods they poured, and next they drank As each might choose, and then the embassy Hastened from Agamemnon's tent. To each Gerenian Nestor spake in turn, and fixed His eyes on each intently, — most of all « Upon Ulysses, — and with many a charge To turn Pelides from his angry mood. Along the edge of the resounding deep They went, and as they walked they offered prayer To earth-embracing Neptune, that their words "s Might move the great soul of ^Eacides. And now they came where lay the Myrmidons Among their tents and ships. Achilles there Drew solace from the music of a harp Sweet-toned and shapely, in a silver frame, **, Part of the spoil he took when he o'erthrew Eetion's town. To soothe his mood he sang The deeds of heroes. By him sat alone Patroclus, silent till the song should cease. On moved the messengers, — before them walked High-born Ulysses, — till they stood beside f Achilles. He beheld, and with the harp Sprang from his seat, surprised. Patroclus saw The heroes also, and arose. Their hands

Page 229
Book IX. 229 The swift Achilles took in his, and said : — v» "Welcome! Ye come as friends. Some press- ing cause Must surely bring you hither, whom I prize, Wronged as I am, beyond all other Greeks." Thus speaking, the great son of Peleus led His guests still farther on, and seated them «s On couches spread with purple coverings, And thus addressed Patroclus, who was near: — "Son of Menoetius, bring a larger vase, And mingle purer wine, and place a cup For each, since these are most beloved friends, — »s, These warriors who now sit beneath my roof." He spake. Patroclus hearkened, and obeyed His well-beloved friend, who meantime placed A block beside the fire, and on it laid Chines of a sheep and of a fatling goat, ,ss And of a sow, the fattest of her kind. Automedon stood by and held them fast; Achilles took the knife and skilfully Carved them in portions, and transfixed the parts With spits. Patroclus, the divine in form, *» Woke to a blaze the fire ; and when the flame Had ceased to rise he raked the glowing coals Apart, and o'er them stretched the spits, and strewed, Raising the flesh, the sacred salt o'er all. And when he had made ready and had spread *t The banquet on the board, Patroclus took

Page 230
230 The Iliad. The bread and offered it to all the guests In shapely canisters. Achilles served The meats, and took his seat against the wall, In front of great Ulysses. There he bade m His friend Patroclus offer sacrifice, Casting the first rich morsels to the flames. The guests put forth their hands and shared the feast; And when the calls of hunger and of thirst Were felt no longer, Ajax gave a nod »7s To Phoenix, which divine Ulysses saw, And filled his cup and drank to Peleus' son :— "Thy health, Achilles! Princely feasts like this Attend us both in Agamemnon's tent And here, —for here is all that makes a feast **, Complete ; yet now is not the time to think Of pleasant banquets, for our thoughts are turned — O Jove-born warrior ! — to a fearful time Of slaughter, and the fate of our good ships, — Whether we save them harmless, or the foe Destroy them, if thou put not on thy might. For now the haughty Trojans, and the troops Who come from far to aid them, pitch their camp Close to our fleet and wall, and all around Kindle their many fires, and boast that we No longer have the power to drive them back From our black galleys. Jupiter, the son Of Saturn, shows them favorable signs With lightnings from above; and, terrible

Page 231
Book IX. In aspect and in valor, Hector makes m Sad havoc, trusting in the aid of Jove, And neither reverences gods nor men, — Such rage possesses him. He prays that soon The morn may rise, that he may hew the prows From all our ships and give them to the flames, *» And slay the Greeks, bewildered with the smoke. For me, I greatly fear the gods will grant That he fulfil his threat, and that our doom Will be to perish on the Trojan coast, And far away from Argos, famed for steeds. w Rise, then, though late, — rise with a resolute mind, And from the hard-pressed sons of Greece drive back The assailing Trojans. Thou wilt else lament Hereafter, when the evil shall be done And shall admit no cure. Bethink thee well 310 How from the Greeks thou mayst avert the day Of their destruction. O my friend, when first He sent thee forth to Agamemnon's help From Phthia's coast, thy father Peleus said : — "' My child, from Juno and Minerva comes 31s The gift of valor, if they choose to give.- But curb thou the high spirit in thy breast, For gentle ways are best, and keep aloof From sharp contentions, that the old and young Among the Greeks may honor thee the more.' m "Such was the old man's charge, forgotten now. Yield, then, and lay thy wrath aside. Large gifts Doth Agamemnon offer, to appease

Page 232
232 The Iliad. Thy wounded spirit. Hear me, if thou wilt, Recount what gifts the monarch in his tent « Hath promised thee : — Seven tripods which the fire Hath never touched; six talents of pure gold; And twenty shining caldrons; and twelve steeds Of hardy frame, victorious in the race, Whose feet have won him prizes in the games. &, No beggar would he be, nor yet with store Of gold unfurnished, in whose coffers lay The prizes those swift-footed steeds have won. Seven faultless women, skilled in household arts, He offers, — Lesbians, whom he chose when thou Didst overrun the populous Lesbian isle, — n» In beauty eminent among their sex. These he bestows, and with them he will send Her whom he took away, — Briseis, pure — He swears it with a mighty oath — as pure 3*, As when she left thy tent. All these he gives At once ; and if, by favor of the gods, We lay the mighty city of Priam waste, Thou shalt load down thy galley with large store Of gold and silver, entering first when we, 34s The Greeks, divide the spoil. Then mayst thou choose Twice ten young Trojan women, beautiful Beyond their sex save Helen. If we come Safe to Achaian Argos, richly stocked With milky kine, thou mayst become to him 39 A son-in-law, and cherished equally

Page 233
Book IX. 233 With his sole son Orestes, who is reared Right royally. Three daughters there, within The monarch's stately halls, — Chrysothemis, Laodice, and Iphianassa, —dwell, 35s And thou mayst choose among them, and mayst lead Home to the house of Peleus her who best Deserves thy love. Nor needest thou endow The bride, for he will give an ampler dower Than ever father to his daughter gave, — 3«0 Seven cities with thronged streets, — Cardamyle, Enope, grassy Hira, Pherae famed Afar, Antheia with rich pasture-grounds, ^Epeia beautiful, and Pedasus With all its vineyards ; all are near the sea, ses And stand the last before you reach the coast Of sandy Pylos. Rich in flocks and herds Their dwellers are, and they will honor thee As if thou wert a god, and, ruled by thee, Will pay large tribute. These will he bestow, x70 Let but thine anger cease. But if the son Of Atreus and his gifts still move thy hate, At least have pity on the afflicted Greeks, Pent in their camp, who now would honor thee As if thou wert a god; and thou shalt gain »s Great glory as their champion, and shalt slay This Hector, who even now is close at hand, And in a murderous frenzy makes his boast That none of all the chieftains whom the fleet

Page 234
234 The Iliad. Of Greece brought hither equals him in might." The swift Achilles answered him and said : — "Son of Laertes, nobly born, and versed In wise devices, let me frankly speak Just as I think, and just as I shall act, And then ye will not importune me more. Hateful to me, as are the gates of hell, Is he who, hiding one thing in his heart, Utters another. I shall speak as seems To me the best; nor deem I that the son Of Atreus or the other Greeks can move My settled purpose, since no thanks are paid To him who with the enemy maintains A constant battle: equal is the meed Of him who stands aloof and him who fights Manfully; both the coward and the brave Are held in eqial honor, and they die An equal death, — the idler and the man Of mighty deeds. For me there is no store Of wealth laid up from all that I have borne, Exposing life in battle. As a bird Brings to her unfledged young the food she finds, Though she herself be fasting, so have I Had many a night unvisited by sleep, And passed in combat many a bloody day, Fighting beside these w.uriors for their wives. Twelve cities have I with my fleet laid waste, And with my Myrmidons have I o'erthrown Eleven upon this fertile Trojan coast.

Page 235
Book IX. 235 Full many a precious spoil from these I bore, And to Atrides Agamemnon gave. 410 He, loitering in his fleet, received them all; Few he distributed, and many kept. To chiefs and princes he indeed assigned Prizes, which now they hold. From me alone Of all the Greeks he takes my prize; he takes -its My bride, whom well I loved ;— and let him keep The damsel. But what need is there that Greeks Wage war against the Trojans? For what cause Did Agamemnon, gathering from our realms An army, lead it hither? Was it not v0 Because of fair-haired Helen? Are the sons Of Atreus, then, the only men on earth Who love their wives? Nay, every good man loves And cherishes his spouse ; and mine I loved Tenderly, though the captive of my spear: 4»s And now, since he hath taken my reward Away and treacherously dealt with me, Let him not try again, for I am warned, And he will not persuade me. Let him take Counsel with thee, Ulysses, and the rest, «o How to drive back the enemy and save The fleet from flames. Already has he done Much without me ; a rampart he has raised, And round it dug a deep, broad trench, and filled The trench with palisades. Yet can he not - 433 Resist the man-destroyer Hector thus. This Hector, when I fought among the Greeks,

Page 236
236 The Iliad. Never would fight at distance from the walls, And ventured not beyond the Scaean gates And beechen tree. There waited he for me v» Upon a time, and scarce escaped with life From my assault. Now, since I do not choose To fight with noble Hector, I shall pay, To-morrow, sacrifice to Jupiter And all the gods, and load my galleys well, 44s And draw them to the water. Then shalt thou See — if thou care for such a sight — my ships Sailing upon the fishy Hellespont At early morning, with their crews on board Eager to pull the oar; and if the god 4s» Of ocean grant a prosperous voyage, then On the third day we reach the fertile coast Of Phthia. Large possessions left I there When I came hither in an evil hour; And thither I shall carry with me gold 43s And ruddy brass, and women of fair forms, And burnished steel, — the spoils I won in war. The prize he gave me, Agamemnon, son Of Atreus, takes, with many insults, back. Bear him this message, —give it openly, 4«0 That others of the Greeks may be like me Indignant should he impudently dare To wrong them also :— Let him ne'er again, Though shameless, dare to look me in the face. I will not join in council or in act 4t* With him: he has deceived and wronged me once,

Page 237
Book IX. 237 • And now he cannot wheedle me with words. Let once suffice. I leave him to himself, To perish. All-providing Jupiter Hath made him mad. I hate his gifts; I hold 470 In utter scorn the giver. Were his gifts Tenfold — nay, twenty-fold — the worth of all That he possesses, and with added wealth From others, — all the riches that flow in Upon Orchomenus, or Thebes, the pride 47s Of Egypt, where large treasures are laid up, And through whose hundred gates rush men and steeds, Two hundred through each gate ; — nay, should he give As many gifts as there are sands and dust Of earth, — not even then shall Atreus' son 4*, Persuade me, till I reap a just revenge For his foul contumelies. I will wed No child of Agamemnon Even though She vied with golden Venus in her charms, And with the blue-eyed Pallas in her skill, #s I would not wed her. Let him choose among The Greeks a fitter husband, — one whose rule Is wider than my own. For if the gods Preserve me, and I reach my home again, My father, Peleus, will bestow on me 4,» A consort. Many are the Achaian maids, Daughters of chiefs who hold our citadels In Hellas, and in Phthia, and of these,

Page 238
238 T/u: Iliad. Her who shal! most delight me I will make My well-beloved wife. My soul has longed Earnestly, with a fitting spouse betrothed Duly, to make my dwelling there, and there Enjoy the wealth which aged Peleus won; For not to be compared with life is all The wealth which, as men say, was treasured up In Ilium's populous town in time of peace, Ere the Greeks came, nor all the stores contained Within the stony threshold of the god Who bears the bow, Apollo, on the coast Of rocky Pytho. We may gather spoil Of oxen and of fatling sheep, and bring Tripods from war, and yellow-maned steeds: The breath of man no force can seize or hold, And when it leaves the enclosure of the teeth It comes not back. My mother said to me — The goddess, silver-footed Thetis, said — A twofold fate conducts me to my death;— If I remain to fight beneath the walls Of Ilium, my return will be cut off, But deathless my renown ; if I return To the dear land in which my fathers dwell, My glory will be nought, but long my life, And late will come to me the stroke of death. And now I counsel all to sail for home, For never will ye see the overthrow Of lofty Ilium. Jove the Thunderer Stretches his great hand o'er her, and htr sonj

Page 239
Book IX. 239 Take courage. Go ye now, and take with you This message to the princes of the Greeks, — As is the office of an embassy, — s»s And bid them meditate some wiser plan To save their galleys and the host of Greeks Within the hollow barks. The plan which brought You hither cannot serve you while I keep My anger unappeased. Let Phoenix stay «0 To pass the night with us, that he may sail To-morrow, if it please him, to the land We love; I take him not against his will." He ceased; and silent were the ambassadors, Astonished at his passionate words. At last ai Phoenix, the aged knight, with many tears And sighs, took up the word, in grief and fear Lest Hector should destroy the Grecian fleet: — "Illustrious son of Peleus, if indeed Thou wilt return, nor carest to repel s*, From our swift galleys the consuming fire, Because thou art offended, how shall I, Dear child, remain without thee? When at first Peleus, the aged knight, from Phthia sent Thee, yet a boy, to Agamemnon's aid, s4s Unskilled as then thou wert in cruel war And martial councils, — where men also gain A great renown, — he sent me with thee, charged To teach thee both, that so thou mightst become In words an orator, in warlike deeds ss, An actor. Therefore, my beloved child,

Page 240
240 The Iliad. Not willingly shall I remain behind; Not even though a god should promise me That, overcoming the decays of age, I might become a beardless youth again, sss As when from Hellas and its companies Of lovely maids I came a fugitive, And left Amyntor, son of Ormenus,— My father, —angry with me for the sake Of a fair-tressed wanton, whom he loved, Treating my mother basely. To my knees My mother came and prayed me ceaselessly, First, to possess the woman, that she then Might loathe the elder one; and I obeyed. My father knew it, and with many a curse Invoked the hateful furies to forbid That any child who owed his birth to me Should ever sit upon his knees. The gods — The Jove of Hades and dread Proserpine — Confirmed his curse. To slay him with the sword s70 Was my first thought. Some god subdued my wrath, Reminding me of what the public voice Would say, and infamy that would ensue, — Lest I among the Achaians should be called A parricide. I could not brook to dwell s7s Within my father's palace while he thus Was wroth with me. My kindred and my friends Came round me, and besought me to remain, And stayed beside me. Many a fatling ewe And many a slow-paced ox with curving horns s*,

Page 241
Book IX. They slew, and many a fattened swine they stretched Over the flame of Vulcan. From the casks Of the old chief his wine was freely drawn. Nine nights they slept surrounding me, while each Kept watch in turn : nor ever were the fires sfc Put out; one blazed beneath the portico Of the fair hall, and near the chamber-door Another glimmered in the vestibule. But when upon me rose the tenth dark night, I broke my aptly-jointed chamber-doors, s9» And issued forth, and easily o'erleaped The wall around the palace, quite unseen Of watching men and of the serving maids. I fled through spacious Hellas to the fields Of Phthia, nurse of flocks, and to her king, s,s Peleus, who kindly welcomed me, and loved Me as a father loves his only son, Born to large wealth in his declining years. He made me rich, and gave me sovereign rule Over much people. My abode was fixed In farthest Phthia, where I was the prince Of the Dolopians. As for thee, my care, Godlike Achilles, made thee what thou art . I loved thee from my soul: thou wouldst not go With any other to the feast, nor take &,s Thy food at home until upon my knees I placed thee, carved thy meats, and gave them thee, And poured thy wine. The tunic on my breast Was often wetted by thee when the wine vol. i. ii r

Page 242
242 The Iliad. Gushed in thy petulant childhood from thy lips. Thus many things did I endure for thee, And many toils perform ; and since the gods Vouchsafed no son to me, it was my thought To train thee as a son, that thou mightst be, O godlike man! the bulwark of my age. «*s And now subdue that mighty spirit of thine: 111 it becomes thee to be merciless: The gods themselves are placable, though far Above us all in honor and in power And virtue. We propitiate them with vows, e~ Incense, libations, and burnt-offerings, And prayers for those who have offended. Prayers Are daughters of almighty Jupiter, — Lame, wrinkled, and squint-eyed, — that painfully Follow Misfortune's steps; but strong of limb *s And swift of foot Misfortune is, and, far Outstripping all, comes first to every land, And there wreaks evil on mankind, which prayers Do afterwards redress.' Whoe'er receives Jove's daughters reverently when they approach, *3, Him willingly they aid, and to his suit They listen. Whosoever puts them by With obstinate denial, they appeal To Jove, the son of Saturn, and entreat That he will cause Misfortune to attend The offender's way in life, that he in turn May suffer evil and be punished thus. Wherefore, Achilles! do thou also yield

Page 243
Book IX. 243 The honor due Jove's daughters, freely given By other valiant men. If Atreus' son «*, Brought thee no gifts, nor promised others still, But kept his anger, I would never ask That thou shouldst lay aside thy wrath and come To help the Argives in their bitter need. But he bestows large gifts, and adds a pledge &ts Of others yet in store, and he hath sent The best men of the army, who to thee Are dearest, to entreat thee. Spurn thou not These, nor their embassy, although at first Thine anger was not causeless. We have heard «» The praise of heroes of the elder time, Inflamed to vehement anger, yet appeased By gifts, and yielding to persuasive words. One instance I remember: long ago It happened, and I will relate it here «ss Among my friends. Around the city-walls Of Calydon did the Curetes strive In battle with the /Etolians; they destroyed Each other fearfully. The /Etolians fought To save the pleasant town of Calydon, k», And the Curetes warred to lay it waste. Diana of the golden throne had caused The war, displeased with CEneus, who withheld From her the first-fruits of his fertile field: While hecatombs were burnt in sacrifice «s To feast the other gods, to her alone — Daughter of Jove — no offering was brought;

Page 244
244 The Iliad. For either he forgot, or thought the rite Of little moment; but he greatly erred. And now the child of Jove, the archer-queen, Incensed, sent forth against him from the wood A white-tusked wild boar, which upon his lands Entered, and ravaged them, and brought to earth Many tall trees : tree after tree they fell, With roots uptorn, and all the blossoms on, That promised fruit. Him Meleager, son Of CEneus, slew, with many hunters called From neighboring cities, bringing many hounds. A few could not subdue him : he had made Many already mount the funeral pile. Diana kindled round the boar a strife For the beast's head and bristly hide, — a war 'Twixt the Curetes and the /Etolian band Of braves. The war, while Meleager fought, Went not with the Curetes, nor could they, Though many, keep the field. But wrath at last Seized Meleager, — wrath, which rages oft Even in prudent minds. Incensed against Althaea, his own mother, he remained At home with Cleopatra, his young wife, The beauteous, whom a delicate-footed dame, Marpessa, daughter of Evenus, bore To Idas, bravest in his time among The sons of men,— so brave that once he drew A bow against Apollo for the sake Of his neat-footed bride. The honored pair

Page 245
Book IX. 245 Within the palace used to call their child Alcyone; for when the archer-god, Apollo, from her husband bore away The mother, Cleopatra sadly wailed, 700 As wails the halcyon. So beside his spouse Dwelt Meleager, brooding ever o'er The violent anger which his mother's curse Had kindled. Grieving for a brother's death, She supplicated heaven, and often struck 70s Her hands against the teeming earth, and called— Kneeling, her bosom all bedewed with tears — On Pluto and the cruel Proserpine, To put her son to death. From Erebus The pitiless Erinnys, wandering 710 In darkness, heard the prayer. Then straightway rose A sound of fearful tumult at the gates: The towers were battered,-and the elder chiefs Of the /Etolians hastened to entreat The aid of Meleager, and they sent 71s Priests of the gods, a chosen band, to pray That he would come to their defence. Large gifts They promised. Where the soil of Calydon Was best, they bade him choose a fruitful field Of fifty acres, half for vines, and half, 7» Cleared of the trees, for tillage. Earnestly Did aged CEneus, famed for horsemanship, Beseech him; to the chamber of his son, High-roofed, he climbed, and at the threshold shook

Page 246
246 The Iliad. The massive doors with knocking as he sued. -m His sisters and his reverend mother joined Their supplications: he resisted still. And much his friends, the dearest and most prized, Besought him, but they vainly strove to swerve His steadfast mind, till his own chamber felt n, The assault, and the Curetes climbed the walls To fire the populous city. Then the nymph, His graceful wife, entreated him with tears, And spake of all the horrors which o'ertake A captured city, — all the men cut off 735 By massacre, the houses given to flames, The children and deep-bosomed women dragged Into captivity. Her sorrowful words He heard; his spirit was disturbed ; he went To gird his glittering armor on, and thus 7» He saved the /Etolians from a fearful doom, Obeying his own impulse. The reward Of rare and costly gifts they gave him not, Though thus he rescued them. Be not thy thought Like his, my friend ; let no invisible power m Persuade thee thus to act. Far worse it were To wait, and when our fleet is all on fire Offer thy aid. Accept the gifts at once: Then will the Greeks, as if thou wert a god, Hold thee in honor. If without the gifts 730 Thou enter later on the field of fight, Thou wilt not have like honor with the host, Although thou turn the assault of battle back."

Page 247
Book IX. 247 Then did Achilles, swift of foot, reply : — "O ancient Phoenix, father, loved of Jove, • Such honor need I not; for the decree Of Jove, I deem, already honors me, And will detain me by my beaked ships While breath is in my lungs, and I have power To move these knees. Yet one thing I would say, — And bear it thou in mind, — vex not my soul With weeping and lamenting for the sake Of Agamemnon ; it becomes thee not — Thou who art loved by me — to yield thy love To him, unless thou wouldst incur my hate. its And thou shouldst be the enemy of him Who wrongs me. Reign thou equally with me, And share my honors. These will carry back My answer. Thou remain, and, softly couched, Sleep here: with early morn will we consult v, Whether to leave this region or remain." He spake, and, nodding to Patroclus, gave A signal to prepare an ample couch For Phoenix, while the other chiefs prepared To leave the tent. Then Ajax Telamon, 77s The godlike chief, addressed his comrades thus : — "Son of Laertes, nobly born, and skilled In sage devices, let us now depart, Since, as it seems, the end for which we came Cannot be compassed thus, and we must bear 7*, With speed the unwelcome answer to the Greeks, Who sit expecting us; while in his breast

Page 248
248 The Iliad. The implacable Achilles bears a fierce And haughty heart, nor doth he heed the claim Of that close friendship of his fellow-chiefs, Which at the Grecian fleet exalted him Above all others. Unrelenting one! Even for a brother's death a price is paid, Or when a son is slain: the slayer dwells At home among his people, having made The appointed expiation. He to whom The fine is offered takes it, and his thirst Of vengeance is appeased. But in thy heart The gods have kindled an unquenchable rage, All for a single damsel, -— and behold, Seven more we offer, passing beautiful, With many gifts beside. Let, then, thy mood Be softened : have respect to thine own roof; For we are guests beneath it, sent from all The assembled host, and strong is our desire To be thy dearest and most cherished friends Of all the Achaians, many as they are." Achilles the swift-footed answered thus : — "Illustrious Ajax, son of Telamon, Prince of the people! all that thou hast said, I well perceive, is prompted by thy heart. Mine swells with indignation when I think How King Atrides mid the assembled Greeks Heaped insults on me, as if I had been A wretched vagabond. But go ye now And bear my message. I shall never think

Page 249
Book IX. 249 Of bloody war till noble Hector, son Of Priam, slaughtering in his way the Greeks, Shall reach the galleys of the Myrmidons, To lay the fleet in flames. But when he comes 315 To my own tent and galley, he, I think, Though eager for the combat, will desist." He spake. Each raised a double cup and poured Libations to the gods; they then returned Beside the fleet. Ulysses led the way. &» Patroclus bade the attendant men and maids Strew with all speed a soft and ample bed For Phoenix. They obeyed, and spread the couch With skins of sheep, dyed coverlets, and sheets Of lawn; and there the old man lay to wait &s The glorious morn. Meantime Achilles slept Within the tent's recess, and by him lay Phorbas's daughter, whom he carried off From Lesbos, — Diomede, rosy-cheeked. Upon the other side Patroclus lay, «30 With slender-waisted Iphis by his side, Given by the great Achilles when he took Scyros the tall, where Enyeus ruled. Now when the ambassadors were come within The tent of Agamemnon, all the chiefs «3s Rose, one by one, and, lifting up to them Their golden goblets, asked the news they brought And first Atrides, king of men, inquired :— "Renowned Ulysses, glory of the Greeks! Tell me, will he protect our fleet from flames, a*, 11*

Page 250
250 The Iliad. Or does he, in his wrath and pride, refuse?" Then spake the hardy chief Ulysses thus :— "Atrides Agamemnon, glorious king Of men! he will not let his wrath abate, But rages yet more fiercely, and contemns Thee and thy gifts. He leaves thee to consult With thine Achaians by what means to save The fleet and army; for himself he means To-morrow, with the early dawn, to launch His well-appoiuted galleys on the sea, And will advise the other Greeks to spread The sails for home, since they will never see The overthrow of lofty Troy, for Jove The Thunderer stretches his protecting hand Above her, and her sons have taken heart. Such are his words ; and those who went with me Are present, — Ajax and the heralds both, Sage men, — the witnesses to what I say. The aged Phoenix stays behind to sleep, And on the morrow to attend his chief To their beloved country, — if he will, For else by no means will he take him hence." He spake; and all were silent, all amazed At what they heard, for these were bitter words. Long sat the sons of Greece in silent thought, Till Diomed, the great in battle, spake :— "Atrides Agamemnon, glorious king Of men! I would thou hadst not deigned to ask The illustrious son of Peleus for his aid,With offer of large gifts; for arrogant a70 He is at all times: thou hast made him now More insolent. Now leave him to himself, To go or to remain : he yet will fight When his mood changes, or some god within Shall move him. Let us do what I advise :— «7s Betake we all ourselves to rest, but first Refresh ourselves with food and wine; in them Is strength and spirit. When the rosy morn Shall shine, command thou that the foot and horse Be speedily drawn up before the fleet, sso And thou encourage them with cheerful words, And fight among them in the foremost rank." He spake. The kings assented, and admired The words of the horse-tamer Diomed; And, pouring out libations, to their tents «s They all departed, and lay down to rest, And took into their souls the balm of sleep.</span>
				</p>
				</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>