<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 13</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle"></span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-13" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<p>
				<span>EN Jove had brought the Trojans and Hector, beside the ships, he left them there To toil and struggle and endure, while he Turned his resplendent eyes upon the land Of Thracian horsemen, and the Mysians, skilled s To combat hand to hand, and the famed tribe Of long-lived Hippomulgi, reared on milk, And the most just of men. On Troy no more He turned those glorious eyes, for now he deemed That none of all the gods would seek to aid 10 Either the Greeks or Trojans in the strife. The monarch Neptune kept no idle watch; For he in Thracian S.imos, dark with woods, Aloft upon the highest summit sat O'erlooking thence the tumult of the war; i» For thence could he behold the Idaean mount, And Priam's city, and the Grecian fleet. There, coming from the ocean-deeps, he sat, vol.. 11. 1 A

their chief,

Page 2
2 The Iliad. And pitied the Greek warriors put to rout Before the Trojans, and was wroth with Jove. Soon he descended from those rugged steeps, And trod the earth with rapid strides; the hills And forests quaked beneath the immortal feet Of Neptune as he walked. Three strides he took, And at the fourth reached JEgzc, where he stopped, And where his sumptuous palace-halls were built, * Deep down in ocean, golden, glittering, proof Against decay of time. These when he reached, He yoked his swift and brazen-footed steeds, With manes of flowing gold, to draw his car, so And put on golden mail, and took his scourge, Wrought of fine gold, and climbed the chariot-seat, And rode upon the waves. The whales came forth From their deep haunts, and frolicked round his way: They knew their king. The waves rejoicing smoothed A path, and rapidly the coursers flew; *s Nor was the brazen axle wet below. And thus they brought him to the Grecian fleet. Deep in the sea there is a spacious cave, Between the rugged Imbrus and the isle Of Tenedos. There Neptune, he who shakes The shores, held back his steeds, took off theiryoke, Gave them ambrosial food, and, binding next Their feet with golden fetters which no power Might break or loosen, so that they might wait « Their lord's return, he sought the Grecian host. Still did the Trojans, rushing on in crowds,

Page 3
Book XIII. 3 Like flames or like a tempest, follow close Hector, the son of Priam ; still their rage Abated not; with stormy cries they came; ,/ They hoped to seize the fleet and slay the Greeks Beside it. But the power who swathes the earth And shakes it, Neptune, coming from the deep, Revived the valor of the Greeks. He took The shape of Calchas and his powerful voice, ss And thus to either Ajax, who yet stemmed The battle with a resolute heart, he spake :— "O chieftains! yours it is to save the host, Recalling your old valor, with no thought Of fatal flight. Elsewhere I feel no dread «0 Of what the daring sons of Troy may do Who climb the wall in throngs; the well-greaved Greeks Will meet them bravely. But where Hector leads, Fierce as a flame, his squadrons, he who boasts To be a son of sovereign Jove, I fear «s Lest we should sorely suffer. May the gods Strengthen your hearts to stand against the foe, And flinch not, and exhort the rest to stand, And drive him back, audacious as he is, From the swift ships, though Jove should urge him on." Thus earth-surrounding Neptune said, and touched Each hero with his sceptre, filled their hearts With valor, gave new lightness to their limbs

Page 4
4 The Iliad. And feet and hands, and then, as when a hawk Shoots swiftly from some lofty precipice n And chases o'er the plain another bird, So swiftly Neptune, shaker of the shores, Darted from them away. Oileus' son Perceived the immortal presence first, and thus At once to Telamonian Ajax spake : — s0 "Some god, O Ajax, from the Olympian hill, Wearing the augur's form, hath bid us fight Beside the ships; nor can it be the seer Calchas, for well I marked his feet and legs As he departed; easily by these •\> The gods are known. I feel a spirit roused In my own bosom eager to engage In the fierce strife; my very feet below, And hands above, take part in the desire." And thus the son of Telamon replied :— 90 "So also these strong hands that grasp the spear Burn eagerly to wield it, and my heart Is full of courage. I am hurried on By both my feet, and vehemently long To try alone the combat with this chief 9s Of boundless valor, Hector, Priam's son." Thus they conferred, rejoicing as they felt That ardor for the battle which the god Had breathed into their hearts. Meantime he roused The Achaians at the rear, who in their ships too Sought respite, and whose limbs were faint with toil, And their hearts sad to see the Trojan host

Page 5
Book XIII. 5 With tumult pouring o'er the lofty wall. As they beheld, the tears came gushing forth From underneath their lids; they little hoped i0s For rescue from destruction; but when came The power that shakes the shores, he woke anew The spirit of their valiant phalanxes. Teucer he first addressed, and Leitus, The hero Peneleus and Thoas next, n0 Deipyrus, Meriones expert In battle, and Antilochus his peer, And thus exhorted them with winged words :— "Shame on you, Argive youths! I put my trust In your tried valor to defend our fleet; «s But if ye fear to face the perilous fight, The day has risen which shall behold us fall Vanquished before the Trojans. O ye gods! These eyes have seen a marvel, a strange sight And terrible, which I had never thought ,» Could be, — the Trojans close upon our ships, They who, erewhile, were like the timid deer That wander in the wood an easy prey To jackals, pards, and wolves, —weak things, unapt For combat, fleeing, but without an aim. "i Such were the Trojans, who till now ne'er dared Withstand the might and prowess of the Greeks Fven for an hour. But now. afar from Troy They give us battle at the hollow ships, All through our general's fault, and through the sloth Of the Greek warriors, who, displeased with him, is,

Page 6
6 The Iliad. Fight not for their swift galleys, but are slain Beside them. Yet although our sovereign chief, Atrides Agamemnon, may have done Foul wrong, dishonoring the swift-footed son ijs Of Peleus, still ye cannot without blame Decline the combat. Let us then repair The mischief done ; the hearts of valiant men Are soon appeased. And not without the loss Of honor can your fiery courage sleep, ,» Since ye are known the bravest of the host. I would not chide the weak, unwarlike man For shrinking from the combat; but for you, — I look on you with anger in my heart. Weaklings! ye soon will bring upon yourselves us Some sorer evil if ye loiter thus. Let each of you bethink him of the shame And infamy impending. Terrible The struggle is before us. Hector storms The ships, loud-shouting Hector; he has burst is» The gate and broken the protecting bar." So Neptune spake, encouraging the Greeks. While firmly stood the serried phalanxes Round either Ajax, nor could Mars himself, Nor Pallas, musterer of armed hosts, «ss Reprove their order. There the flower of Greece Waited the Trojans and their noble chief, Spear beside spear, and shield by shield, so close That buckler pressed on buckler, helm on helm, And man on man. The plumes of horse-hair touched

Page 7
Book XIII. 7 Each other as they nodded on the crests «si Cf the bright helms, so close the warriors stood. The lances quivered in the fearless hands Of warriors eager to advance and strike The enemy. But the men of Troy began i«s The assault; the fiery Hector was the first To rush against the Greeks. As when a stone Rolls from a cliiT before a wintry flood That sweeps it down the steep, when mighty rains Have worn away the props that held it fast; ,7» It rolls and bounds on high; the woods around Crash, as it tears its unresisted way Along the slope until it reach the plain, And there, however urged, moves on no more ; — So Hector, menacing to cut his way m Through tents and galleys to the very sea, Slaying as he went forward, when he now Met the firm phalanxes and pressed them close, Stopped suddenly ; the sons of Greece withstood His onset and repulsed it, striking him *s With swords and two-edged spears, and made thechief Give way before the shock. He lifted up His voice and shouted to the Trojans thus : — "Trojans and Lycians and Dardanians skilled In fighting hand to hand, stand firm. Not long i«s Will the Greeks bide my onset, though drawn up Square as a tower in close array. My spear, I trust, will scatter them, if true it be That Juno's husband, Sovereign of the mods,

Page 8
8 The Iliad. And Lord of thunders, prompts my arm to-day." »r, He spake, and kindled in the breasts of all Fresh courage. In the band Deiphobus Marched proudly, Priam's son, with his round shield Before him, walking with a quick, light step Behmd its shelter. Then Meriones ,« Aimed at the chief his glittering spear; the point Missed not; it struck the orb of bullock's hide, Yet did not pierce it, for the weapon broke Just at the neck. Deiphobus held forth His shield far from him, dreading to receive ■» A spear-thrust from the brave Meriones. Vexed thus to lose the victory, and the spear Snapped by the blow, Meriones fell back Into the column of his friends, and passed Hastily toward the camp and ships, to bring «* A powerful spear that stood within his tent, While others fought, and fearful was the din. Then Teucer first, the son of Telamon, Smote gallant Imbrius, son of Mentor, lord Of many steeds. He, ere the Greeks had come ™ To Troy, dwelt at Pedaeum and espoused Medesicasta, Priam's spurious child. But when the well-oared galleys of the Greeks Mustered at Troy, he also came, and there Was eminent among her chiefs, and dwelt «s With Priam, and was honored as his son. The son of Telamon beneath the ear Pierced him with his long javelin, and drew forth

Page 9
Book XIII. 9 The weapon. Headlong to the earth he fell. As on a mountain height, descried from far, m Hewn by a brazen axe, an ash is felled And lays its tender sprays upon the ground, Thus Imbrius fell, and round him in his fall Clashed his bright armor. Teucer sprang in haste To spoil the dead, but Hector hurled at him His shining spear; the wary Teucer stepped Aside, and just escaped the brazen blade. It struck Amphiniachus, Cteatus' son, And Actor's grandson ; as he came to join The battle, he was smitten in the breast, »*, And fell, his armor clashing round his limbs. Then Hector flew in haste to tear away From the large-souled Amphimachus the helm That cased his temples. Ajax saw, and hurled His glittering spear at Hector as he came.: ns It made no wound ; for Hector stood equipped All o'er in formidable brass. The spear Struck on the bossy shield with such a shock As forced him to recoil, and leave unspoiled The bodies, which the Achaians dragged away. ,*, For Stichius and Menestheus, chief among The Athenians, bore the dead Amphimachus To the Greek camp, while the two men of might, The chieftains Ajax, lifted Imbrius up; And as two lions, bearing off among ms The close-grown shrubs a goat, which they have snatched

Page 10
10 The Iliad. From sharp-toothed dogs, uplift it in their jaws Above the ground, so the two warriors raised The corpse of Imbrius, and stripped off the mail, While, angered that Amphilochus was slain, »j, Oileus' son struck from the tender neck The head, and sent it far among the crowd, Whirled like a ball, to fall at Hector's feet. Meantime was Neptune moved with grief to see His grandson perish in that desperate fray, »ss And passed among the Achaian tents and ships Encouraging the men, and planning woes For Ilium. There he met Idomeneus, Expert to wield the spear, as he returned From caring for a comrade who had left *», The battle, wounded in the knee, and whom His friends had carried in. Idomeneus Had called the surgeons to his aid, and now Was hastening to the field, intent to bear His part in battle. Him the monarch god »s Of ocean thus addressed, but first he took The voice of Thoas, King Andraemon's son, Whose father ruled the ^Etolians through the bounds Of Pleuron, and in lofty Calydon, And like a god was honored in the land. v» "O counsellor of Crete, Idomeneus! Where are the threats which late the sons of Greece Uttered against the Trojans?" Promptly came The Cretan leader's answer : " No man here, O Thoas, seems blameworthy, for we all »7s

Page 11
Book XIII. II Are skilled in war, nor does unmanly fear Hold any back ; nor from the difficult strife Does sloth detain one warrior. So it is Doubtless that it seems good to Saturn's son, The All-disposer, that the Greeks, afar" tso From Argos, should ingloriously fall And perish. Thoas, thou wert ever brave, And didst exhort the laggards. Cease not now To combat, cease not to exhort the rest." And Neptune, he who shakes the earth, re- joined : — «ss "Idomeneus, whoever keeps aloof From battle, willingly, to-day, may he Never return from Troy, but be the prey Of dogs. Take thou thy arms and come with me, For we must quit ourselves like men, and strive *r, To aid our cause, although we be but two. Great is the strength of feeble arms combined, And we can combat even with the brave." So speaking, Neptune turned to share the toils Of war. Idomeneus, who now had reached «;s His princely tent, put on his glorious mail, And seized two spears, and flew upon his way, Like lightning grasped by Saturn's son and flung Quivering above Olympus' gleaming peak, A sign to mortals, dazzled by the blaze, 300 So glittered, as he ran, his brazen mail. His fellow-warrior, good Meriones, Met him beside the tent, for he had come

Page 12
12 The Iliad. To fetch a brazen javelin thence, and thus The stout Idomeneus addressed his friend :— 30s "O son of Molus, swift Meriones, Dearest of all my comrades! Why hast thou Thus left the battle-field? Hast thou a wound, — A weapon's point that galls thee? Dost thou bring A message to me? Think not that I sit v Within my tent an idler: I must fight." Discreetly did Meriones reply :— "Idomeneus, whose sovereign counsels rule The well-armed Cretans, I am come to seek A spear if one be left within thy tents. s•s I broke the one I bore, in hurling it Against the shield of fierce Deiphobus." The Cretan chief, Idomeneus, rejoined :— "If spears thou seek, there stand within my tent Twenty and one against the shining walls. I took them from slain Trojans. T is my wont Never to fight at distance from the foe, And therefore have I spears, and bossy shields, And helms, and body-mail of polished brass." Then spake in turn discreet Meriones :— vs "Within my tent are also many spoils Won from the Trojans, and in my black ship; But they are far away. I do not think That I forget what valor is. I fight Among the foremost in the glorious strife i*, Where'er the battle calls me. Other men Among the well-armed Greeks may not have seen

Page 13
Book XIII. 13 What I perform, but thou must know me well." Idomeneus, the Cretan leader, spake :— "I know thy courage well. What need hast thou 313 To speak as thou hast done? If all of us, The bravest of the Greeks, were set apart To form an ambush ;— for an ambush tries And shows men's valor; there the craven, there The brave, is known ; the coward's color comes s*, And goes; his spirit is not calm within « His bosom, so that he can rest awhile And tremble not; he shifts his place; he sits On both his feet;. his heart beats audibly Within his breast; his teeth at thought of death 31s Chatter; the brave man's color changes not, Nor when with other warriors he sits down In ambush is he troubled, but he longs To rise and mingle in the desperate fray ; — For thee, in such an ambush, none could blame 310 Thy courage or thy skill. If there the foe Should wound thee from afar, or smite thee near, The weapon would not strike thy neck behind, Or pierce thy back, but enter at thy breast Or stomach, as thou wert advancing fast 3ss Among the foremost. But enough of this. Come! stand we here no longer, idiot-like, Lest some one chide us sharply. Hasten thou, And bring a sturdy javelin from the tent." He spake. Mcriones, like Mars in port & And swiftness, hastened to the tent and brought

Page 14
14 The Iliad. A brazen spear, and joined Idomeneus, Eager for battle. As the god of war, The man-destroyer, comes into the field, With Terror, his strong-limbed and dauntless son, *s Following and striking fear into the heart Of the most resolute warrior, when from Thrace They issue armed against the Ephyri, Or else against the Phlegyans large of soul, And hearken not to both the hosts, but give »» To one the victory; so Meriones Advanced to battle with Idomeneus, Leaders of heroes both, and both equipped In glittering helms. And first Meriones Spake and addressed his fellow-warrior thus :— 37s "Son of Deucalion, at which point wilt thou Enter the throng? Upon the army's right, Its centre, or its left? The long haired Greeks Seem most to need our aid upon the left." Then spoke Idomeneus, in turn, the prince $&, Of Cretans : " At the centre of the fleet Are others who will guard it. Posted there Are either Ajax and the most expert Of Grecian archers, Teucer, not less skilled In standing fight, and amply will they task #s The arm of Hector, Priam's son, though bent On desperate conflict, and though passing fierce. With all his fierceness, he will find it hard To quell their prowess, never yet o'ercome. And fire the ships, unless Saturnian Jove *»

Page 15
Book XIII. Himself should cast on them the flaming torch. Nor yet will Telamonian Ajax yield To any man of mortal birth, or reared Upon the grains of Ceres, or whom brass Or ponderous stones can wound. He would not own The warlike son of Peleus mightier »s Than he in standing fight, although in speed He vies not with him. Lead us then to join The army's left, that we may learn at once Whether our fate in battle shall confer 40o Glory on other men, or theirs on us." So spake the chief. Meriones, the peer Of Mars in swiftness, hastened till he joined The army where his comrade bade. The foe Beheld Idomeneus, who like a flame ,0s Swept on with his companion all in arms Gloriously wrought ; they raised from rank to rank The battle-cry, and met him as he came, And hand to hand, before the galleys' sterns Was waged the combat. As when storms arise, 4«, Blown up by piping winds, when dust lies loose Along the roads, a spreading cloud of dust Fills the wide air, so came the battle on Between the bands that struggled eagerly To slay each other. All along the line 41s The murderous conflict bristled with long spears That tore the flesh; the brazen splendor, shot From gleaming helmets and from burnished mail And shining bucklers, all in narrow space.

Page 16
16 The Iliad. Dazzled the eyes. Brave-hearted would he be, m The man who, gazing on it, could have seen The furious strife rejoicing or unmoved. Meantime the potent sons of Saturn each Favored a different side, and planned new toils For all the warriors, Jupiter had willed 42s That Hector and the Trojans should prevail, Yet had he not decreed the Achaian host To perish before Troy; he only sought To honor Thetis and her large-souled son. But Neptune, mingling with the Greeks, aroused iw, Their martial spirit. From the hoary deep He.came unmarked, for deeply was he grieved To see the Greeks give way before the host Of Troy, and he was wroth with Jupiter. Both gods were of one race, and owed their birth «s To the same parents; but the elder-born Was Jupiter, and wiser. For that cause Not openly did Neptune aid the Greeks, But, as by stealth, disguised in human form, Moved through their army and encouraged them «4» To combat. Thus it was the potent twain Each drew, with equal hand, the net of strife And fearful havoc, which no power could break Or loosen, stretched o'er both the warring hosts, And laying many a warrior low in death. 41s And now, although his brows were strewn with gray. Idomeneus, encouraging the Greeks, Rushed on the Trojans, and revived the fight.

Page 17
Book XIII. 17 He slew Orthryoneus, who just before, Drawn by the rumor of the war, had left 4s» Cabesus, and now made a lover's suit For Priam's fairest daughter. Without dower He sought to wed Cassandra, promising A vast exploit,— to drive the Greeks from Troy, In spite of all their valor. The old king 4ss Consented that the maiden should be his; And now he fought, and trusted to fulfil His promise. But Idomeneus took aim, And cast his glittering javelin at the youth. It struck him marching proudly on, nor stopped «&, The weapon at the brazen mail, but pierced The stomach. With a clash the warrior fell, And thus the victor boasted over him :— "Orthryoneus, I deem thee worthy of praise Beyond all other men, if thou perform 4ss What thou hast undertaken, — to defend Dardanian Priam, who has promised thee His daughter. We would make a.compact too, And will perform it, — to bestow on thee A spouse, the fairest daughter of the house 470 Of Atreus' son, and we will send for her To Argos, if thou join us, and lay waste The well built Ilium. Now, then, follow me, And at the ships which brought us we will treat Of marriage, and will make no niggard terms." 47s So spake Idomeneus, and dragged the slain Through the sharp conflict by the foot. He met B

Page 18
18 The Iliad. Asius, who walked before his car, and came To avenge his friend. The attending charioteer Behind him reined the steeds, that they should breathe 4&, Over the shoulders of their lord, who sought To smite Idomeneus. The Greek was first To strike; he plunged the spear into his throat Below the chin, and drave the weapon through. The Trojan fell to earth as falls an oak, 43s Poplar, or stately pine, which woodmen fell With their sharp axes on the mountain-side, To form a galley's beam. So there he lay Stretched out before his coursers and his car, And gnashed his teeth, and clenched the bloody dust. The charioteer, amazed, and losing power «, Of action, dared not turn the horses bark To bear him from the foe. Antilochus The warlike cast his spear, and in the midst Transfixed him. Little did the brazen mail ws Avail to stay the blade, which cleft its way Into the stomach. With a sudden gasp He toppled from the sumptuous chariot-seat, And large-souled Nestor's son, Antilochus, Drave with the chariot to the well-armed Greeks. *» Deiphobus, who sorrowed for the fate Of Asius, drawing near Idomeneus, Hurled at him his bright spear. The Greek beheld, As face to face they stood, and scaped the stroke, Covered by his round shield, two-handled, strong, s»s

Page 19
Book XIII. 19 With bullocks' hides and glittering brass. With this He hid himself, close couched within, and turned The brazen point aside. The buckler rang Shrilly; the weapon glanced away, yet flew Not vainly from the Trojan's powerful hand: s» It struck Hypsenor, son of Hippasus, The shepherd of the people, on the side Where lies the liver, just below the breast. His knees gave way; he fell ; Deiphobus Thus shouted o'er the dead his empty boast :— us "Not unavenged lies Asius, and no doubt, In journeying to the massy gates and wall Of Hades, will rejoice that I have sent A soul to be companion of his way." He spake; and at his boast the Greeks were moved s*, With anger, — most of all Antilochus The warlike; yet he left not to the foe His slain companion, but made haste to hold His shield above him. His beloved friends, Mecisteus, son of Echius, and the prince m Alastor, lifted up, with many a groan, The corps?,.and bore it to the roomy ships. Meantime the valor of Idomeneus Remitted not; he vehemently longed To cover many a Trojan with the night no Of death, or fall himself with clashing arms, In warring to defend the ships of Greece. The brave Alcathoti •, the beloved son

Page 20
20 The Iliad. Of /Esyetus, whom Anchises made His son-in-law, — for he had given to him ns Hippodameia, eldest-born of all His daughters, whom her parents, while she dwelt With them, loved dearly, fair and wise beyond All other maidens of her age, and skilled In household arts ; so that the noblest prince m0 Of the broad Trojan kingdom made her his ; — Him, by the weapon of Idomeneus, Did Neptune bring to death. The sparkling eyes Grew dim, and stiffened were the shapely limbs, For neither could he flee nor turn aside; m But as he stood before him, column-like, Or like a towering tree, Idomeneus Transfixed him in the bosom with his spear The brazen coat of mail gave way, which oft Had saved him, breaking with a sharp, shrill sound Before the severing blade. He fell to earth ss, With noise ; the spear stood planted in his heart, And as he panted quivered through its length, Yet soon its murderous force was spent and still. And then the victor boasted thus aloud :— sss "Deiphobus, does this appear to thee A fair return, when three are slain for one, Or hast thou boasted idly? Yet do thou, Vain as thou art, stand forth and face me here, And I will teach thee of what race I am, — st» An offshoot of the stock of Jove, whose son Was Minos, guardian of our Crete, and he

Page 21
Book XIII. Was father of the good Deucalion. Deucalion's son am I, and I am king O'er many men in the broad isle of Crete. My galleys brought me thence to be the dread Of thee, thy father, and the men of Troy." He spake. Deiphobus, irresolute, Stood doubting whether to retreat and bring Some other of the heroic sons of Troy To aid him, or to try the fight alone. As thus he mused, it seemed most wise to seek /Eneas. Him he found withdrawn among The rear of the army, for he was displeased With noble Priam, who had paid his worth With light esteem. Deiphobus approached, And thus with winged words accosted him :— "^Eneas, counsellor of Troy, if thou Hadst ever a regard to him who was Thy sister's husband, it becomes thee now To avenge him. Follow me, and help avenge Alcathous, guardian of thy tender years, Slain by the spear of famed Idomeneus.'' He spake; and at his words /Eneas felt His courage rise. Impatient for the fight, He went to meet Idomeneus ; yet fear Fell not upon the Greek as if he were A puny boy : he stood and kept his ground. As, when a mountain boar, unterrified, Waits in the wilderness the hunter-crew, That come with mighty din, his bristly back

Page 22
22 The Iliad. Rises, his eyes shoot fire, he whets his tusks, And fiercely keeps both dogs and men at bay, — So did Idomeneus, expert to wield The spear, await /Eneas hastening on »s With fury. Not a backward step he made, But called upon his warrior-friends aloud, Looking at Aphareus, Ascalaphus, Deipyrus, Meriones, and last Antilochus, all skilled in arts of war, And thus exhorted them with winged words :— "Haste hither, O my friends,'and bring me aid. I stand alone, in dread of the approach Of swift JEneas, who comes fiercely on, Powerful to slay, and in his prime of youth, . *n The highest vigor of the human frame. Yet, were our years the same, that chief or I Would quickly triumph at the other's cost." He spake, and all with one accord draw near And stood by him, with shields obliquely held «10 Upon their shoulders. On the other side ^^neas cheered his comrades on. He fixed His look on Paris, and Deiphobus, And nobly born Agenor, who, like him, Were leaders of the Trojans. After these «,s The soldiers followed, as the thronging flock Follow the ram that leads them to the fount From pasture, and the shepherd's heart is pleased. So was /Eneas glad at heart to see The multitude of warriors following him. **>

Page 23
Book XIII. 23 Then mingled they in battle hand to hand Around Alcathous, with their ponderous spears, And fearfully upon their bosoms rang The brass, as through the struggling crowd they aimed Their weapons at each other. Two brave men, &,s ^Eneas and Idomeneus, the peers Of Mars, conspicuous o'er their fellows, strove With cruel brass to rend each other's limbs. And first ^Eneas cast his spear to smite Idomeneus, who saw it as it came, And shunned it. Plunging in the earth beyond, It stood and quivered ; it had left in vain The Trojan's powerful hand. Idomeneus Next smote CEnomaiis: the spear brake through His hollow corselet at the waist ; it pierced 433 And drank the entrails : down amid the dust He fell, and grasped the earth with dying hand. Idomeneus plucked forth the massy spear, But, pressed by hostile weapons, ventured not To strip the sumptuous armor from the dead; «*, Since now no more the sinews of his feet Were firm to bear him rushing to retake His spear, or start aside from hostile spears. Wherefore in standing fight he warded off The evil hour, nor trusted to his feet «js To bear him fleetly from the field. He moved Slowly away, and now Deiphobus, Who long had hated him and bitterly,

Page 24
24 The Iliad. Aimed at him his bright spear; it missed its mark, And struck Ascalaphus, the son of Mars. ss0 The weapon cleft the shoulder of the Greek, Who fell amid the dust, and clenched the earth. Not yet the clamorous Mars, of passionate mood, Had heard that in the fray his son was slain; But on the summit of the Olympian mount «ss He sat, o'ercanopied by golden clouds, Restrained from combat by the will of Jove, With other gods, forbidden, like himself, To aid the combatants. Meantime around Ascalaphus the combat hand to hand «0 Still raged. Deiphobus had torn away The slain man's shining helm, when suddenly Meriones sprang forward, spear in hand, And smote him on the arm; the wounded limb Let fall the helm, resounding as it fell, And with a vulture's leap Meriones Rushed toward him, plucking out from the torn flesh The spear, and falling back among the crowd. Polites, brother of the wounded, threw Both arms around his waist, and bore him off «70 From the loud din of conflict, till he reached His swift-paced steeds, that waited in the rear Of battle, with their chariot nobly wrought And charioteer. These took him back to Troy, Heavily groaning and in pain, the blood «7s Yet gushing from the newly wounded limb. Still fought the other warriors, and the noise

Page 25
Book XIII. 25 Of a perpetual tumult filled the air. ./Eneas, rushing upon Aphareus, Caletor's son, who turned to face him, thrust «*, A sharp spear through his throat. With drooping head, And carrying shield and helmet to the ground, He fell, and rendered up his soul in death. Antilochus, as Thoon turned away, Attacked and smote him, cutting off the vein a* That passes through the body to the neck. This he divided sheer; the warrior fell Backward, and lay in dust, with hands outstretched To his beloved friends. Antilochus Flew to the slain, and from his shoulders stripped °» The armor, casting cautious glances round; While toward him pressed the Trojans on all sides, Striking the fair broad buckler with their darts, Yet could not even score with pointed brass The tender skin of Nestor's son ; for still «9s Neptune, the shaker of the sea-coast, kept Watch o'er him while the weapons round him show- ered. Yet he withdrew not from his foes, but moved Among the crowd, nor idle was his spear, But wielded right and left, and still he watched r» With'resolute mind the time to strike the foe At distance, or assault him near at hand. The son of Asius, Adamas, beheld The hero meditating thus, and struck, vol. 11. a

Page 26
26 The Iliad. In close attack, the middle of his shield r0? With a sharp brazen spear. The dark-haired god Who rules the deep denied to Adamas The life he sought, and weakened the hard stroke. Part of the Trojan's weapon, like a stake Hardened by fire, stood fixed within the shield, 710 Part lay on earth, and he who cast it slunk Among his comrades to avoid his fate. Meriones, pursuing with his spear, Smote him between the navel and the groin, AVhere deadliest are the wounds in battle given 71s To man's unhappy race. He planted there The cruel blade, and Adamas, who fell, Writhed panting round it, as a bullock bound By cowherds on the mountain with strong cords Pants as they lead him off against his will. 7*, So wounded, Adamas drew heavy breath, And yet not long. The brave Meriones, Approaching, plucked the weapon forth, and night Came o'er the eyes of Adamas. At hand Stood Helenus, and struck Deipyrus m Upon the temple with his ponderous sword, Of Thracian make, and cut the three-coned helm Away, and dashed it to the ground ; it rolled Between a Grecian warrior's feet, who stooped And took it up, while o'er its owner's eyes 730 The darkness gathered. Grieved at this, the son Of Atreus, Menelaus great in war, Rushed forward, threatening royal Helenus.

Page 27
Book XIII. 27 He brandished his sharp spear; the Trojan drew His bow; advancing, one to hurl a lance, 73s And one to send an arrow. Priam's son Let fly a shaft at Menelaus' breast. The bitter missile from the hollow mail Glanced off. As when from the broad winnowing-fan' On some wide threshing-floor the swarthy beans, 7*, Or vetches, bound before the whistling wind And winnower's force, so, bounding from the mail Of gallant Menelaus, flew afar The bitter shaft. Then Menelaus, great In battle, smote the hand of Helenus 7« That held the polished bow ; the brazen spear Passed through the hand, and reached the bow, and there Stood fixed, while Helenus, avoiding death, Drew back among his comrades, with his hand Held low, and trailing still the ashen stem. 7s0 Magnanimous Agenor from the wound Drew forth the blade, and wrapped the hand in wool, Carefully twisted, taken from a sling Carried by an attendant of the chief. To meet the glorious Menelaus sprang 7s5 Pisander, led by his unhappy fate To perish, Menelaus! by thy hand In that fierce conflict. When the two were near, Advancing toward each other, Atreus' son Took aim amiss; his spear flew far aside. 1— Pisander smote the buckler on the arm

Page 28
28 The Iliad. Of mighty Menelaus, yet drave not The weapon through. The broad shield stopped its force, And broke it at the neck; yet hoped he still For victory, and exulted. Then the son 7*s Of Atreus drew his silver-studded sword And sprang upon his foe, who from beneath His buckler took a brazen battle-axe, With a long stem of polished olive-wood. Both struck at once. Pisander hewed away, v Below the crest, the plumed helmet-cone Of Atreus' son, who smote, above the nose, Pisander's forehead, crashing through the bones. Both bleeding eyes dropped to the ground amid The dust; he fell ; he writhed; the conqueror, 77s Advancing, set his heel upon his breast, And stripped the armor off, and, boasting, said :— "Thus shall ye leave unharmed the fleet that brought The knights of Greece, ye treaty-breaking sons Of Ilium, never satisfied with war! 7*, Yet lack ye not still other guilt and shame, — Wrong done to me, ye dogs! Ye have not feared The wrath of Hospitable Jove, who flings The thunder, and will yet destroy your town, With all its towers, — ye who, without a cause, 7ss Bore off my youthful bride, and heaps of wealth, When she had given you welcome as our guests. And now ye seek to burn with fire the fleet

Page 29
Book XIII. 29 With which we cross the ocean, and to slay The Grecian heroes. Ye shall yet be forced, rr, Eager for battle as ye are, to pause. O Father Jupiter, who hast the praise Of highest wisdom among gods and men! All this is of thy ordering. How hast thou Favored this arrogant crew of Troy, in love ns With violence, who never have enough Of war and all its many miseries! All other things soon satisfy desire, — Sleep, love, and song, and graceful dance, which most Delight in more than warlike toils, — yet they *» Of Troy are never satisfied with war." So spake the illustrious man, and, having stripped The bloody armor from the dead, he gave The spoil to his companions, and rejoined The warriors in the van. Harpalion then, A son of King Pytemenes, with whom He left his home to join the war at Troy, Assaulted him. He never saw again His native land. Close to Atrides' shield, He struck it in the centre with his lance, »1 0 Yet could not drive the weapon through the brass, And backward shrank, in fear of death, among His comrades, looking round him lest some foe Should wound him with the spear. Meriones Let fly a brazen arrow after him, at3 Which, entering his right flank below the bone,

Page 30
30 The Iliad. Passed through and cleft the bladder. Down he sank Where the shaft struck him, breathing out his life In the arms of his companions. Like a worm He lay extended on the earth; his blood Gushed forth, a purple stream, and steeped the soil. The large-souled Paphlagonians came around, And placed him in a chariot, sorrowing, And bore him to the gates of sacred Troy. The father followed weeping, but no hand &,s Was raised to avenge the slaughter of his son. Yet deeply moved was Paris at his death, For he had been Harpalion's guest among The Paphlagonians. Grieving for the slain, He sent a brazen arrow from his bow. «9» Now there was one Euchenor, rich and brave, The son of Polyidus, hoary seer; His dwelling was in Corinth, and he came, Forewarned and conscious of his fate, to Troy; For often Polyidus, good old man, «3S Warned him that he within his palace halls Should perish by a grievous malady, Or else be slain by Trojan hands beside The Grecian fleet. So, to escape at once The censure of the Achaians and disease, uo He came, lest he in after times might rue His choice. And now between the jaw and ear Did Paris smite him ; from the warrior's limbs Life fled, and darkness gathered o'er his eyes. And then they fought; like a devouring fire us

Page 31
Book XIIL That battle was; but Hector, dear to Jove, Had not yet learned that on the left the Greeks Made havoc of his men ; for in that hour The Greeks had almost made the victory theirs, So greatly had the god who shakes the shores Kindled their courage, and with his own arm Brought timely aid. Still Hector, pressing on Where first he leaped within the gates and wall, Broke the close phalanxes of shielded Greeks. There, ranged beside the hoary deep, the ships Of Ajax and Protesilaus lay. The wall that guarded them was low, and there Warriors and steeds in fiercest conflict met; There the Boeotians, there in their long robes The Iaonians, there the Locrians, there The men of Fhthia, and the Epeians famed For valor, held back Hector, struggling on To reach the ships, yet found they had no power To drive the noble warrior from the ground, For he was like a flame. The chosen men Of Athens formed the van. Menestheus, son Of Peteus, was their leader, after whom Phidas and Stichius followed, and with them The gallant Bias. Meges, Phyleus' son, With Dracius and Amphion, marshalled there The Epeians; while the Phthian band were led By Medon and Podarces, warlike chief. And Medon was the great Oileus' son, And brother of the lesser Ajax, born

Page 32
32 The Iliad. Without the tie of wedlock, and he dwelt s7s Far from his native land, in Phylacfe; For by his violent hand the brother died Of Eryopis, whom Oileus made His lawful spouse. Podarces was the son Of Iphiclus, and dwelt in Phylace. «*, These, at the head of Phthia's valiant youth, And cased in massive armor, fought beside Boeotia's warriors for the Grecian fleet. But Ajax swift of foot, Oileus' son, From him of Telamon departed not as Even for an instant. As when two black steers Of equal vigor o'er a fallow draw The strongly jointed plough, till near their horns Streams the warm sweat; the polished yoke alone Holds them asunder, as they move along «90 The furrow, and the share divides the soil That lies between them ; — so the heroic twain Kept near each other. Many men and brave Followed to Troy the son of Telamon As his companions, and, when weariness «« Came o'er his sweaty limbs, relieved their chief Of his broad buckler. But the Locrian host Attended not Oileus' great-souled son, Nor could they ever venture to engage In combat hand to hand. No brazen helms *» Were theirs, with horse-hair plumes, noorbbd shields, Nor ashen spears. They came with him to Troy, Trusting in their good bows, and in their slings

Page 33
Book XIII. 33 Of twisted wool, from which they showered afar Stones that dispersed the phalanxes of Troy. 90s The chieftains Ajax, warring in the van, Clad in their shining armor, fought to check The Trojans and their leader, brazen-mailed, While in the rear the Locrians lurked unseen, And sent their shafts, so that the men of Troy, »«, All order lost, were fain to cease from fight. Then had the Trojans from the ships and tents Turned back, and fled, with fearful loss of life, To lofty Ilium, if Polydamas Had not accosted valiant Hector thus : — "Hector, thou hearkenest not to warning words. Deem'st thou, because a god has given thee strength Beyond all other men for feats of war, That therefore thou art wiser than they all In council? Think not for thyself to claim All gifts at once. On one the god bestows Prowess in war, upon another grace In dance, upon another skill to touch The harp and sing. In yet another, Jove The Thunderer implants the prudent mind, m By which the many profit, and by which Communities are saved; and well doth he Who hath it know its worth. Now let me speak What seems to me the wisest. Round thee flames The encircling war; the valiant sons of Troy, v» Since they have crossed the ramparts, staml aloof, Armed as they are, or fight against large odds

Page 34
34 The Iliad. Scattered among the galleys. Yield thou now The ground, and, summoning the chiefs, decide What plan to follow, — whether we shall storm m The well-oared galleys, should the God vouchsafe The victory to us, — or else depart In safety from the fleet. I greatly fear The Achaians may repay to us the debt Of yesterday. There yet is at the fleet w One who, I think, no longer will refrain Wholly from battle." Thus Polydamas Spake, and the sage advice pleased Hector well, Who, leaping from his chariot to the ground, With all his weapons, said these winged words: — "Remain with all the bravest warriors here, «« Polydamas, while I depart to give The due commands, and instantly return." He spake, and with a shout he rushed away, Seen from afar, like a snow-mountain's peak, w» And flew among the Trojans and allies, Who crowded round the brave Polydamas, The son of Panthous, at Hector's call. Among the foremost combatants he sought Deiphobus, and mighty Helenus, sss The king; he looked for Adamas, the son Of Asius, and for Asius of the house Of Hyrtacus. Some not unharmed he found, Yet not o'ercome; while others lay in death Beneath the galley sterns, where Grecian hands »*, Had slain them; others on the wall, struck down

Page 35
Book XIII. 35 By missiles, or in combat hand to hand. There on the left of that disastrous fray He met the noble Alexander, spouse Of fair-haired Helen, as he cheered his men, *ss And rallied them to battle. Hector thus Addressed his brother with reproachful words :— "Accursed Paris! noble but in form, Effeminate seducer! where are now Deiphobus, and mighty Helenus? 970 And Adamas, the son of Asius, where? And Asius, son of Hyrtacus? and where Orthryoneus? Now towering Ilium sinks From her high summit, and thy fate is sure." And then the godlike Paris answered thus :— m "Since it hath pleased thee, Hector, thus to cast Reproach on me, though innocent, I may Another day neglect the toils of war, Although in truth my mother brought me forth Not quite unapt for combat. Since the hour s*0 When thou didst lead the battle to the ships With thy companions, we have held our ground, Here on this spot, contending with the Greeks. Three chiefs for whom thou askest have been slain. Deiphobus and mighty Helenus, « Both wounded in the hand by massive spears, Have left the field; the son of Saturn saved Their lives. Now lead us wheresoe'er thou wilt, And we will follow thee with resolute hearts, Nor deem that thou wilt find in us a lack «o

Page 36
3S The Iliad. Of valor while our strength of arm remains. The boldest cannot tight beyond his strength." With such persuasive words the warrior calmed His brother's anger, and they went where raged The hottest conflict round Cebriones, « Phalces, Ortbasus, and the excellent Polydamas, with Palmys at his side, And Polyphoetes, godlike in his form, And where Ascanius and Morys fought, Sons of Hippotion. They the day before «»* Came marching from Ascania's fertile fields, Moved by the will of Jove to share the war. All these swept on, as when a hurricane, A thunder-gust, from Father Jupiter Buffets the plain, and mingles with the deep, ,•"s In mighty uproar, and the billows rise All over the resounding brine, and swell, Whitening with foam, and chase each other on. So moved the Trojans on, man after man, In close array, all armed in glittering brass, «»o Following their generals. Hector, Priam's son, And peer of Mars in battle, led the van, His round shield held before him, tough with hides And overlaid with brass. Upon his brow The gleaming helmet nodded as he moved. «»s On every side he tried the phalanxes, If haply they might yield to his assault, Made from beneath that buckler; but the Greeks In spirit or in order wavered not.

Page 37
Book XIII. 37 And Ajax, striding forth, defied him thus :— mm "Draw nearer, friend! Think'st thou to frighten thus The Greeks? We are not quite so inexpert In war, although so cruelly chastised By Jupiter. Thou thinkest in thy heart That thou shalt make our ships thy spoil; but we «»s Have also our strong arms to drive thee back, And far more soon the populous town of Troy, Captured and sacked, shall fall by Grecian hands. And now I warn thee that the hour is near When, fleeing, thou shalt pray to Father Jove i0*, And all the immortals, that thy long-maned steeds, Bearing thee townward mid a cloud of dust Along the plain, may be more swift than hawks." As thus he spake, an eagle, to the right, High in the middle heaven, flew over him, ,»« And, gladdened by the omen, all the Greeks Shouted ; but then illustrious Hector spake : — "Babbl er and boaster, what wild words are these? 0 Ajax! would that I were but as sure To be the child of aegis-bearing Jove, »,*, Brought forth by Juno the august, and held In honor everywhere like that which crowns Apollo and Minerva, as I know That to the Greeks this very day will bring Destruction, and that thou shalt also lie *»,, Slain with the others, if thou dare abide The stroke of my long spear, which yet shall tear

Page 38
33 The Iliad. Thy dainty flesh, and thou, with thy full limbs, Shalt be the feast of Trojan dogs and birds, Unburied by the galleys of the Greeks." So Hector spake, and led his warriors on. They followed with a mighty shout; the rear Sent up as loud a cry. On the other side Shouted the Greeks, nor intermitted now Their wonted valor, but stood firm to breast The onset of the chosen men of Troy. The mingled clamor of both hosts went up To heaven, and to the shining seat of Jove.</span>
				</p>
				</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>