<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">THE COMBAT OF HECTOR AND AJAX</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Prowess of Hector. — Meeting of Minerva and Apollo near the Scaean Gates. — They incite Hector to challenge the Greeks to a Single Combat. — Ajax selected by Lot to meet Hector. — The Combat ended by the Night- — Proposal of An tenor to deliver Helen to the Greeks. — Refusal of Paris, who offers to restore her Wealth. — Rejection of this Offer by Agamemnon. — A Truce for burying the Dead. — The Greek Camp fortified.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-7" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<p>
				<span>THE illustrious Hector spake, and rapidly ￼Passed through the gate, and with him issued forth His brother Alexander, — eager, both, For war and combat. As when God bestows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To glad the long-expecting mariners, A favorable wind while wearily They beat the ocean with their polished oars, Their arms all nerveless with their length of toil, Such to the expecting Trojans was the sight Of the two chiefs. P'irst Alexander slew Menesthius, who in Arne had his home, A son of Areithoiis the king. Large-eyed Philomedusa brought him forth To the mace-bearer Areithoiis. And Hector smote Eloneus, the spear Piercing his neck beneath the brazen casque, And straightway he dropped lifeless. Glaucus then Son of Hippolochus, and chief among The Lycians — in that fiery onset slew Iphinoiis, son of Dexius, with his spear. It pierced the warrior's shoulder as he sprang To mount his rapid car, and from the place He fell to earth, his limbs relaxed in death Now when Minerva of the azure eyes Beheld them in the furious combat thus Wasting the Grecian host, she left the peaks Of high Olympus, and came down in haste To sacred Ilium. Straight Apollo flew To meet her. for he marked from Pergamus Her coming, and he greatly longed to give The victory to the Trojans. As they met Beside the beechen tree, the son of Jove, The king Apollo, spake to Pallas thus : —

Page 176
176 The Iliad. "Why hast thou, daughter of imperial Jove, Thus left Olympus in thine eager haste? Seek'st thou to turn in favor of the Greeks War's wavering chances ? — for I know too well Thou hast no pity when the men of Troy Are perishing. But, if thou wilt give ear To me, I shall propose a better way. Cause we the conflict for this day to cease, And be it afterward renewed until An end be made of Troy, since it hath pleased You, goddesses, to lay the city waste." And blue-eyed Pallas answered: "Be it so, 0 mighty Archer. With a like intent 1 left Olympus for this battle-field Of Greeks and Trojans. But by what device Think'st thou to bring the combat to a pause?" Then spake the king Apollo, son of Jove, In turn to Pallas: "Let us seek to rouse The fiery spirit of the Trojan knight Hector, that he may challenge in the field Some Greek to meet him, singly and alone, In mortal combat. Then the well-armed Greeks, Stung by the bold defiance, will send forth A champion against Priam's noble son." He spake. The blue-eyed goddess gave assent And straightway Helenus, beloved son Of Priam, in his secret mind perceived The purpose of the gods consulting thus, And came and stood by Hector's side and said:

Page 177
Book VII. 177 "O Hector, son of Priam, and like Jove In council, wilt thou hearken to my words Who am thy brother? Cause the Trojans all «s And all the Greeks to sit, while thou shall stand Proclaiming challenge to the bravest man Among the Achaians to contend with thee In mortal combat. It is not thy fate To fall and perish yet, for thus have said 70 The ever-living gods, whose voice I heard." He spake ; and Hector, hearing him, rejoiced, And went between the hosts. He bore his spear, Holding it in the middle, and pressed back The ranks of Trojans, and they all sat down. 7s And Agamemnon caused the well-armed Greeks To sit down also. Meantime Pallas sat, With Phoebus of the silver bow, in shape Like vultures, on the boughs of the tall beech, — The tree of Father Jupiter who bears «0 The aegis, — and they looked with great delight Upon the array of warriors in thick rows, Horrid with shields and helrmand bristling spears. As when the west wind, rising fresh, breathes o'er The deep, and darkens all its face with waves, ss So seemed the Greeks and Trojans as they sat In ranks upon the field, while Hector stood Between the armies and bespake them thus :— "Ye Trojans, and ye well-armed Greeks, give ear To what my spirit bids me speak. The son •*, Of Saturn, throned on high, hath not vouchsafed 8» L

Page 178
178 The Iliad. To ratify the treaty we have made, But meditates new miseries for us both, Till ye possess the towerycity of Troy, Or, vanquished, yield yourselves beside the barks m That brought you o'er the sea. With you are found The bravest sons of Greece. If one of these Is moved to encounter me, let him stand forth And fight with noble Hector. I propose, And call on Jove to witness, that if he 100 Shall slay me with the long blade of his spear, My arms are his to spoil and to bestow Among the hollow ships; but he must send My body home, that there the sons of Troy And Trojan dames may burn it on the pyre. m But if I take his life, and Phoebus crown My combat with that glory, I will strip His armor off and carry it away To hallowed Ilium, there to hang it high Within the temple of the archer-god no Apollo ; but his body I will send Back to the well-oared ships, that on the beach The long-haired Greeks may hold his funeral rites, And rear his tomb by the wide Hellespont. And then, in time to come, shall some one say, ,»s Sailing in his good ship the dark-blue deep, 'This is the sepulchre of one who died Long since, and whom, though fighting gallantly, Illustrious Hector slew.' So shall he say Hereafter, and my fame shall never die."

Page 179
Book VII. 179 He spake; but utter silence held them all, — Ashamed to shun the encounter, yet afraid To meet it, — till at length, with heavy heart, Rose Menelaus from his seat, and thus Bespake the army with reproachful words :— "s "O boastful ones, no longer to be called Greek warriors, but Greek women! a disgrace Grievous beyond all others will be ours, If none be found in all the Achaian host To meet this Hector. May you, every one, m, There where ye now are sitting, turn to earth And water, craven as ye are, and lost To sense of glory! I will arm myself For this encounter. With the immortal gods Alone it rests to give the victory." 13s He spake, and put his glorious armor on. Then, Menelaus, had the Trojan's hand Ended thy life, for he was mightier far Than thou, had not the Achaian kings at once Uprisen to hold thee back, while Atreus' son, ,*, , Wide-ruling Agamemnon, took thy hand In his, and made thee listen while he spake :— "Sure, noble Menelaus, thou art mad. Such frenzied daring suits not with the time. Restrain thyself, though thou hast cause for wrath; Nor in thy pride of courage meet in arms ms One so much mightier, — Hector, Priam's son, Whom every other chief regards with fear, Whom even Achilles, braver far than thou,

Page 180
18o The Iliad. Dreads to encounter in the glorious fight . is» Withdraw, then, to thy comrades, and sit down. The Greeks will send some other champion forth Against him ; and though fearless, and athirst For combat, he, I deem, will gladly bend His weary knees to rest should he escape ,» From that fierce conflict in the lists alive." With words like these the Grecian hero changed The purpose of his brother, who obeyed The prudent counsel; and with great delight The attendants stripped the armor from his breast. Then Nestor rose amid the Greeks and said :— "Ye gods! a great calamity hath fallen Upon Achaia. How the aged chief Peleus, the illustrious counsellor and sage, Who rules the Myrmidons, will now lament! — a* He who once gladly in his palace-home Inquired of me the race and pedigree Of the Greek warriors. Were he but to know That all of them are basely cowering now In Hector's presence, how would he uplift 170 His hands and pray the gods that from his limbs The parted soul might pass to the abode Of Pluto! Would to Father Jupiter And Pallas and Apollo that again I were as young as when the Pylian host 173 And the Arcadians, mighty with the spear, Fought on the banks of rapid Celadon And near to Phaea and Iardan's streams.

Page 181
Book VII. 181 There godlike Ereuthalion stood among Our foremost foes, and on his shoulders bore 1«0 The armor of King Areithoiis, — The noble Areithoiis, whom men And graceful women called the Mace-bearer; For not with bow he fought, nor ponderous lance, But broke the phalanxes with iron mace. 1«s Lycurgus slew him, but by stratagem, And not by strength ; he from a narrow way, Where was no room to wield the iron mace, Through Areithoiis thrust the spear: he fell Backward; the victor took his arms, which Mars 190 The war-god gave, and which in after-time Lycurgus wore on many a battle-field. And when within his palace he grew old, He gave them to be worn by one he loved, — To Ereuthalion, who attended him »ss In battle, and who, wearing them, defied The bravest of our host. All trembled ; all Held back in fear, nor dared encounter him. But me a daring trust in my own strength Impelled to meet him. I was youngest then «» Of all the chiefs; I fought, and Pallas gave The victory over him, and thus I slew The hugest and most strong of men; he lay Extended in vast bulk upon the ground. Would I were young as then, my frame unworn *,s By years! and Hector of the beamy helm Should meet an adversary soon ; but now

End of Section 8. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section 9
Page 182
182 The Iliad. No one of all the chieftains here, renowned To be the bravest of the Achaian race, Hastens to meet in arms the Trojan chief." »10 Thus with upbraiding words the old man spake; And straight arose nine warriors from their seats. The first was Agamemnon, king of men; The second, brave Tydides Diomed; And then the chieftains Ajax, bold and strong; -ns And then Idomeneus, with whom arose Meriones, his armor-bearer, great As Mars himself in battle. After them, Eurypylus, Evaemon's valiant son, And Thoas, offspring of Andrcemon, rose, «o And the divine Ulysses, — claiming all To encounter noble Hector in the lists. But then spake Nestor the Gerenian knight: — "Now let us cast the lot for all, and see To whom it falls; for greatly will he aid ^3 The nobly-armed Achaians, and as great Will be his share of honor should he come Alive from the hard trial of the fight." Then each one marked his lot, and all were cast Into the helm of Agamemnon, son »*, Of Atreus. All the people lifted up Their hands in prayer to the ever-living gods, And turned their eyes to the broad heaven, and said: "Grant, Father Jove, that Ajax, or the son Of Tydeus, or the monarch who bears rule »3s . In rich Mycena e may obtain the lot.'

Page 183
Book VII. 183 Such was their prayer, while the Gerenian knight, Old Nestor, shook the lots; and from the helm Leaped forth the lot of Ajax, as they wished. A herald took it, and from right to left Bore it through all the assembly, showing it To all the leaders of the Greeks. No one Knew it, and all disclaimed it. When at last, Carried through all the multitude, it came To Ajax the renowned, who had inscribed *u And laid it in the helmet, he stretched forth His hand, while at his side the herald stood, And took and looked upon it, knew his sign, And gloried as he looked, and cast it down Upon the ground before his feet, and said :— »s° "O friends! the lot is mine, and I rejoice Heartily, for I think to overcome The noble Hector. Now, while I put on My armor for the fight, pray ye to Jove, The mighty son of Saturn, silently, ass Unheard by them of Troy, or else aloud, Since we fear no one. None by strength of arm Shall vanquish me, or find me inexpert In battle, nor was I to that degree Ill-trained in Salamis, where I was born." *so He spake; and they to Saturn's monarch-son Prayed, looking up to the broad heaven, and said :— "O Father Jove! most mighty, most august! Who rulest from the Idaean mount, vouchsafe That Ajax bear away the victory

Page 184
The Iliad. And everlasting honor; but if thou Dost cherish Hector and protect his life, Give equal strength to both, and equal fame." Such were their words, while Ajax armed himself In glittering brass; and, when about his limbs »70 The mail was buckled, forward rushed the chief. As moves the mighty Mars to war among The heroes whom the son of Saturn sends To struggle on the field in murderous strife, So the great Ajax, bulwark of the Greeks, m With a grim smile came forward, and with strides Firm-set and long, and shook his ponderous spear. The Greeks exulted at the sight; dismay Seized every Trojan : even Hector's heart Quailed in his bosom ; yet he might not now 2«0 Withdraw through fear, nor seek to hide among The throng of people, since himself had given The challenge. Ajax, drawing near, upheld A buckler like a rampart, bright with brass, And strong with ox-hides seven. The cunning hand Of Tychius, skilled beyond all other men In leather-work, had wrought it at his home In Hyla. He for Ajax framed the shield With hides of pampered bullocks in seven folds, And an eighth fold of brass, — the outside fold. »*, This Telamonian Ajax held before His breast, as he approached, and threatening said :— "Now shalt thou, Hector, singly matched with me,

Page 185
Book VII. 185 Learn by what chiefs the Achaian host is led Besides Achilles, mighty though he be to To break through squadrons, and of lion-heart Still in the beaked ships in which he crossed The sea he cherishes his wrath against The shepherd of the people, — Atreus' son. But we have those that dare defy thee yet, *0 And they are many. Let the fight begin." Then answered Hector of the plumed helm : — "O high-born Ajax, son of Telamon, And prince among thy people, think thou not To treat me like a stripling weak ol arm, j,s Or woman all untrained to tasks of war. I know what battles are and bloody frays, And how to shift to right and left the shield. Of seasoned hide, and, unfatigued, maintain 'The combat; how on foot to charge the foe a» With steps that move to martial airs, and how To leap into the chariot and pursue The war with rushing steeds. Yet not by stealth Seek I to smite thee, valiant as thou art, But in fair open battle, if I may." vs He spake, and, brandishing his ponderous lance, Hurled it; and on the outer plate of brass, Which covered the seven bullock-hides, it struck The shield of Ajax. Through the brass and through Six folds of hides the irresistible spear 3^ Cut its swift way, and at the seventh was stopped. Then high-born Ajax cast his massive spear

Page 186
The Iliad. In turn, and drove it through the fair, round shield Of Priam's son. Through that bright buckler went The rapid weapon, pierced the well-wrought mail, 3»s And tore the linen tunic at the flank. But Hector stooped and thus avoided death. They took their spears again, and, coming close, Like lions in their hunger, or wild boars Of fearful strength, joined battle. Priam's son 330 Sent his spear forward, striking in the midst The shield of Ajax, but it broke not through The brass; the metal turned the weapon's point. While Ajax, springing onward, smote the shield Of Hector, drave his weapon through, and checked His enemy's swift advance, and wounded him 33« Upon the shoulder, and the black blood flowed. Yet not for this did plumed Hector cease From combat, but went back, and, lifting up A huge, black, craggy stone that near him lay, 3» Flung it with force against the middle boss Of the broad sevenfold shield that Ajax bore. The brass rang with the blow. Then Ajax raised A heavier stone, and whirled it, putting forth His arm's immeasurable strength ; it brake us Through Hector's shield as if a millstone's weight Had fallen. His knees gave way; he fell to earth Headlong; yet still he kept his shield. At once Apollo raised him up; and now with swords, Encountering hand to hand, they both had flown 3s0 To wound each other, if the heralds sent

Page 187
Book vn. 187 As messengers from Jupiter and men Had not approached, — Idseus from the side Of Troy, Talthybius from the Grecian host, — Wise ancients both. Betwixt the twain they held 3ss Their sceptres, and the sage Idteus spake : — "Cease to contend, dear sons, in deadly fray; Ye both are loved by cloud-compelling Jove, And both are great in war, as all men know. The night is come ; be then the night obeyed." 3&, And Telamonian Ajax answered thus :— "Idaeus, first let Hector speak of this, For he it was who challenged to the field The bravest of the Grecian host, and I Shall willingly obey if he obeys." s«s To him in turn the plumed Hector said :— "Ajax, although God gave thee bulk and strength And prudence, and in mastery of the spear Thou dost excel the other Greeks, yet now Pause we from battle and the rivalry 370 Of prowess for this day. Another time We haply may renew the fight till fate Shall part us and bestow the victory On one of us. But now the night is here, And it is good to obey the night, that thou rs Mayst gladden at the fleet the Greeks and all Thy friends and comrades, and that I in turn May give the Trojan men and long-robed dames, In the great city where King Priam reigns, Cause to rejoice, — the dames who pray for me, 330

Page 188
The Iliad. Thronging the hallowed temple. Let us now Each with the other leave some noble gift, That all men, Greek or Trojan, thus may say: 'They fought indeed in bitterness of heart, But they were reconciled, and parted friends.'" #s He spake, and gave a silver-studded sword And scabbard with its fair embroidered belt; And Ajax gave a girdle brightly dyed With purple. Then they both departed, — one To join the Grecian host, and one to meet 3» The Trojan people, who rejoiced to see Hector alive, unwounded, and now safe From the great might and irresistible arm Of Ajax. Straightway to the town they led Him for whose life they scarce had dared to hope. 39s And Ajax also by the well-armed Greeks, Exulting in his feats of arms, was brought To noble Agamemnon. When the chiefs Were in his tents, the monarch sacrificed A bullock of five summers to the son *» Of Saturn, sovereign Jupiter. They flayed The carcass, dressed it, carved away the limbs, Divided into smaller parts the flesh, Fixed them on spits, and roasted them with care, And drew them from the fire. And when the task Was finished, and the banquet all prepared, «a They feasted, and there was no guest who lacked His equal part in that repast. The son Of Atreus, Agamemnon, brave, and lord

Page 189
Book VII. Of wide dominions, gave the chine entire 410 To Ajax as his due. Now when the calls Of thirst and hunger ceased, the aged chief Nestor, whose words had ever seemed most wise, Opened the council with this prudent speech : — "Atrides, and ye other chiefs of Greece! 41s Full many a long-haired warrior of our host Hath perished. Cruel Mars hath spilt their blood Beside Scamander's gentle stream; their souls Have gone to Hades. Give thou, then, command, That all the Greeks to-morrow pause from war, **, And come together at the early dawn, And bring the dead in chariots drawn by mules And oxen, and consume them near our fleet With fire, that we, when we return from war, May carry to our native land the bones, m And give them to the children of the slain. And then will we go forth and heap from earth, Upon the plain, a common tomb for all Around the funeral pile, and build high towers With speed beside it, which shall be alike 430 A bulwark for our navy and our host. And let the entrance be a massive gate, Through which shall pass an ample chariot-way. And in a circle on its outer edge Sink we a trench so deep that neither steeds 4n Nor men may pass, if these proud Trojans yet Should, in the coming battles, press us sore." He spake; the princes all approved his words.

Page 190
190 The Iliad. Meanwhile, beside the lofty citadel Of Ilium and at Priam's palace-gates +w In turbulence and fear the Trojans held A council, and the wise Antenor spake : — "Hearken, ye Trojans, Dardans, and allies, To what my sober judgment bids me speak. Send we the Argive Helen back with all us Her treasures; let the sons of Atreus lead The dame away; for now we wage the war After our faith is broken, and I deem We cannot prosper till we make amends." He spake, and sat him down. The noble chief Paris, the fair-haired Helen's husband, rose 4si To answer him, and spake this winged speech : — "Thy words, Antenor, please me not. Thy skill Could offer better counsels. If those words Were gravely meant, the gods have made tliee mad. But let me here, amid these knights of Troy, 4s» Speak openly my mind. Give up my wife I never will ; but all the wealth I brought With her from Argos I most willingly Restore, with added treasures of my own." 4«0 He said, and took his seat, and in the midst Dardanian Priam rose, a counsellor Of godlike wisdom, and thus sagely spake : — "Hear me, ye Trojans, Dardans, and allies! I speak the thought that rises in my breast. 4's Take now, as ye are wont, your evening meal And set a watch and keep upon your guard;

Page 191
Book VII. 191 But let Idaeus to the hollow ships Repair at morning, and to Atreus' sons — To Agamemnon and his brother king — 470 Make known what Paris, author of this strife, Proposes, and with fairly ordered speech Ask further if they will consent to pause From crual battle till we burn the dead: Then be the war renewed till fate shall part 4;s The hosts and give to one the victory." He spake. The assembly listened and obeyed; All through the camp in groups they took their meal. But with the morn Idaeus visited The hollow ships, and found the Achaian chiefs, Followers of Mars, in council near the prow Of Agamemnon's bark ; and, standing there, The loud-voiced herald spake his message thus :— "Ye sons of Atreus, and ye other chiefs Of all the tribes of Greece, I come to you «ss From Priam and the eminent men of Troy, To say, if it be pleasing to your ears, What Alexander, author of the war, Proposes. All the wealth which in his ships He brought to Troy—would he had perished first! — He will, with added treasures of his own, «. Freely restore ; but her who was the wife Of gallant Menelaus he denies To render back, though all who dwell in Troy Join to demand it . I am furthermore 49s Bidden to ask if you consent to pause

Page 192
192 The Iliad. From cruel battle till we burn our dead: Then be the war renewed till fate shall part The hosts and give to one the victory." He spake; and all were silent for a space. ?90 Then spake at length the valiant Diomed :— "Let none consent to take the Trojan's goods, Nor even Helen ; for a child may see The utter ruin hanging over Troy." He spake. The admiring Greeks confirmed with shouts s,3 The words of Diomed the knight, and thus King Agamemnon to Idaeus said :— "Idaeus, thou thyself hast heard the Greeks Pronounce their answer. What to them seems good Pleases me also. For the slain, I give s10 Consent to burn them ; to the dead we bear No hatred; when they fall the rite of fire Should soon be paid. Let Juno's husband, Jove The Thunderer, bear witness to our truce." The monarch spake, and raised to all the gods s,s His sceptre, while Idaeus took his way To hallowed Ilium. There in council sat Trojans and Dardans, waiting his return. He came, and standing in the midst declared His message. Then they all went forth in haste, s™ Some to collect the slain and some to fell Trees in the forest. From their well-benched ships The Achaians also issued, some to bring The dead together, some to gather wood.

Page 193
Book VII. 193 Now from the smooth deep ocean-stream the sun Began to climb the heavens, and with new rays s* Smote the surrounding fields. The Trojans met, But found it hard to know their dead again. They washed away the clotted blood, and laid — Shedding hot tears — the bodies on the cars. sv And since the mighty Priam's word forbade All wailing, silently they bore away Their slaughtered friends, and heaped them on the pyre With aching hearts, and, when they had consumed The dead with fire, returned to hallowed Troy. sss The nobly-armed Achaians also heaped Their slaughtered warriors on the funeral pile With aching hearts; and when they had consumed Their dead with fire they sought their hollow ships. And ere the morning came, while earth was gray With twilight, by the funeral pile arose »• A chosen band of Greeks, who, going forth, Heaped round it from the earth a common tomb For all, and built a wall and lofty towers Near it, —a bulwark for the fleet and host. s4s And in the wall they fitted massive gates, Through which there passed an ample chariot-way; And on its outer edge they sank a trench, — Broad, deep, — and planted it with pointed stakes. So labored through the night the long-haired Greeks. The gods who sat beside the Thunderer Jove w Admired the mighty labor of the Greeks; Vol. 1. 9 M

Page 194
194 The Iliad. But Neptune, he who shakes the earth, began :— "O Father Jove, henceforth will any one Of mortal men consult the immortal gods? sss Seest thou not how the long-haired Greeks have reared A wall before their navy, and have drawn A trench around it, yet have brought the gods No liberal hecatombs? Now will the fame Of this their work go forth wherever shines *0 The light of day, and men will quite forget The wall which once we built with toiling hands — Phoebus Apollo and myself—around The city of renowned Laomedon." And cloud-compelling Jove in wrath replied : — "Earth-shaking power! what words are these? Some god s» Of meaner rank and feebler arm than thou Might haply dread the work the Greeks have planned. But as for thee, thy glory shall be known Wherever shines the day; and when at last s70 The crested Greeks, departing in their ships, Shall seek their native coasts, do thou o'erthrow The wall they built, and sink it in the deep, And cover the great shore again with sand. Thus shall their bulwark vanish from the plain." s73 So talked they with each other while the sun Was setting. But the Achaians now had brought Their labors to an end; they slew their steers Beside the tents and shared the evening meal, While many ships had come to land with store s&,

Page 195
Book VII. 195 Of wine from Lemnos, which Euneus sent, — Euneus whom Hypsipyle brought forth To Jason, shepherd of the people. These Brought wine, a thousand measures, as a gift To Agamemnon and his brother king, s»s The sons of Atreus. But the long-haired Greeks Bought for themselves their wines ; some gave their brass, And others shining steel ; some bought with hides, And some with steers, and some with slaves, and thus Prepared an ample banquet. Through the night s90 Feasted the long-haired Greeks. The Trojan host And their auxiliar warriors banqueted Within the city-walls. Through all that night The Great Disposer, Jove, portended woe To both with fearful thunderings. All were pale sm With terror; from their beakers all poured wine Upon the ground, and no man dared to drink Who had not paid to Saturn's mighty son The due libation. Then they laid them down To rest, and so received the balm of sleep.</span>
				</p>
				</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>