<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">THE EXPLOITS OF DIOMED</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Valor of Diomed, aided by Minerva- — He is wounded by Pan- darus, and healed by the Goddess, who forbids him to fight with any of the Immortals, save Venus. — His Combat with Pandarus and ./Eneas. — Pandarus slain, and ^Eneas, wounded and in great Danger, rescued by Venus, who in the act is wounded by Diomed, and leaves 4Eneas to the Care of Apollo. — Descent of Mars to the Field in Aid of Hector. — Return of ^Eneas to the Field. — Descent of Juno and Minerva to resist Mars, who is wounded by Diomed. — Return of the Gods to Heaven.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>THEN Pallas to Tydides Diomed Gave strength and courage, that he mi: appear Among the Achaians greatly eminent, And win a glorious name. Upon his head And shield she caused a constant flame to play, Like to the autumnal star that shines in heaven Most brightly when new-bathed in ocean tides. Such light she caused to beam upon his crest And shoulders, as she sent the warrior forth Into the thick and tumult of the fight. Among the Trojans, Dares was the priest Of Vulcan, rich and blameless. His two sons Were Phegeus and Idaus, trained in all The arts of war. They left the host and came To meet Tydides, — on the chariot they, And he on foot; and now, as they drew near, First Phegeus hurled his massive lance. It flew O'er Diomed's left shoulder and struck not. Tydides cast his spear, and not in vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It smote the breast of Phegeus in the midst, » And dashed him from his seat. Idaeus leaped To earth, and left the sumptuous car, nor dared To guard the slain, yet would have met his death Tf Vulcan had not borne him swiftly thence Concealed in darkness, that he might not leave »s The aged man, his father, desolate. The son of Tydeus took the steeds, and bade His comrades lead them to the fleet. Aghast The valiant sons of Troy beheld the sons Of Dares, one in flight, the other slain. *, Meantime the blue-eyed Pallas took the hand Of Mars, and thus addressed the fiery god : — "Mars, Mars, thou slayer of men, thou steeped in blood, Destroyer of walled cities! should we not Leave both the Greeks and Trojans to contend, 3s And Jove to crown with glory whom he will, While we retire, lest we provoke his wrath?" Thus having said, she led the violent Mars From where the battle raged, and made him sit Beside Scamander, on its grassy bank. *, And then the Achaians put the sons of Troy To flight: each leader slew a foe; and first The king of men, Atrides, from his car Struck down the huge-limbed Hodius, who was chief Among the Halizonians. As he turned 4s To flee, the Achaian, smiting him between The shoulders, drove the javelin through his breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heavily clashed his armor as he fell. Then by Idomeneus was PhKstus slain, Son of Meonian Borus, who had come s0 From Tarna, rich in harvests. As he sprang Into his car, Idomeneus, expert To wield the ponderous javelin, thrust its blade Through his right shoulder. From the car he fell, And the dark night of death came over him. ss The Achaian warriors following spoiled the slain. The son of Atreus, Menelaus, slew With his sharp spear Scamandrius, the son Of Strophius, practised in the forest chase, A mighty hunter. Him had Dian taught «0 To strike whatever beast the woody wild Breeds on the hills; but now availed him not The favor of Diana, archer-queen, Nor skill to throw the javelin afar; For Menelaus, mighty with the spear, ,* Followed him as he fled, and in the back Smote him, between the shoulder-blades, and drave The weapon through. He fell upon the ground Headlong, his armor clashing as he fell. And then Meriones slew Phereclus, 70 Son of Harmonius, the artificer, Who knew to shape all works of rare device, For Pallas loved him. It was he' who built The fleet for Paris, — cause of many woes To all the Trojans and to him, — for ill n He understood the oracles of heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him did Meriones, pursuing long, O'ertake, and, smiting him on the right hip, Pierced through the part beneath the bone and near The bladder. On his knees with sad lament so He fell, and death involved him in its shade. And then by Meges was Pedseus slain, Antenor's base-born son, whose noble wife, Theano, reared him with as fond a care As her own children, for her husband's sake. »s And now the mighty spearman, Phyleus' son, Drew near and smote him with his trenchant lance Where meet the head and spine, and pierced the neck Beneath the tongue; and forth the weapon came Between the teeth. He fell, and in the fall -» Gnashed with his teeth upon the cold bright blade. Then did Evaemon's son Eurypylus Strike down Hypsenor, nobly born, the son Of great Dolopion, Scamander's priest, Whom all the people honored as a god. 93 Evaemon's gallant son, o'ertaking him In flight,- with one stroke of his falchion hewed His brawny arm away. The bloody limb Dropped to the ground, and the dark night of death Came o'er his eyes: so cruel fate decreed. too Thus toiled the heroes in that stubborn fight. Nor would you now have known to which array — Trojan or Greek —Tydides might belong; For through the field he rushed with furious speed, Like a swollen river when its current takes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The torrent's swiftness, scattering with a sweep The bridges; nor can massive dikes withstand Its fury, nor embankments raised to screen The grassy meadows, while the rains of Jove Fall heavily, and harvests, late the joy no Of toiling youth, are beaten to the ground. Thus by Tydides the close phalanxes Of Troy were scattered, nor could they endure, All numerous as they were, his strong assault. As Pandarus, Lycaon's eminent son, us Beheld Tydides rush athwart the field, Breaking the ranks, he drew his crooked bow And smote the chief's left shoulder as he came, Striking the hollow corselet. The sharp point Broke through, and blood came gushing o'er the mail. Then called aloud Lycaon's eminent son :— m "Brave Trojans, great in mastery of steeds, Press on ; the bravest of the Grecian host Is smitten, nor, I think, can long survive The grievous wound, if it be true that I, «s At the command of Phoebus, son of Jove, Have left my home upon the Lycian shore." Thus boastfully he spake; but his swift shaft Slew not Tydides, who had now withdrawn. And, standing by his steeds and chariot, spake ,*• To Sthenelus, the son of Capaneus : — "Haste down, kind Sthenelus, and with thy hand Draw the sharp arrow from my shoulder here." He spake, and Sthenelus at once leaped down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood by his side, and from his shoulder drew ,« The winged arrow deeply fixed within. The blood flowed forth upon the twisted rings Of mail, while Diomed, the valiant, prayed :— "Hear me, O child of aegis-bearing Jove, Goddess invincible! if ever thou ,*, Didst aid me or my father in the heat Of battle, aid me, Pallas, yet again. Give me to slay this Trojan; bring him near, Within my javelin's reach, who wounded me, And now proclaims — the boaster — that not long Shall I behold the brightness of the sun." us So prayed he, and Minerva heard his prayer And lightened all his limbs, — his feet, his hands, — And, standing near him, spake these winged words : — "War boldly with the Trojans, Diomed; 1s0 For even now I breathe into thy frame The ancestral might and fearless soul that dwelt In Tydeus, peerless with the steed and shield. Lo! I remove the darkness from thine eyes, That thou mayst well discern the gods from men; iss And if a god should tempt thee to the fight, Beware to combat with the immortal race; Only, should Venus, child of Jupiter, Take part in battle, wound her with thy spear." The blue-eyed Pallas spake, and disappeared; And Diomed went back into the field And mingled with the warriors. If before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spirit moved him fiercely to engage The men of Troy, a threefold courage now Inspired him. As a lion who has leaped «ss Into a fold — and he who guards the flock Has wounded but not slain him — feels his rage Waked by the blow ; — the affrighted shepherd then Ventures not near, but hides within the stalls, And the forsaken sheep are put to flight, ,70 And, huddling, slain in heaps, till o'er the fence The savage bounds into the fields again; — Such was Tydides midst the sons of Troy. Astynoiis first he slew, Hypenor next, The shepherd of the people. One he pierced ,7s High on the bosom ,vith his brazen spear, And smote the other on the collar-bone With his good sword, and hewed from neck and spine The shoulder. There he left the dead, and rushed To Abas and to Polyeidus, sons ,», Of old Eurydamas, interpreter Of visions. Ill the aged man had read His visions when they joined the war. They died, And Diomed, the valiant, spoiled the slain. Xanthus and Thoon he encountered next, t3s The sons of Phaenops, born in his old age. No other child had he, to be his heir, And he was worn with length of years. These t vo Tydides smote and took their lives, and left Grief to their father and regretful cares, ,*, Since he no more should welcome their return</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From war, and strangers should divide his wealth. Then smote he Chromius and Echemon, sons Of Dardan Priam, in one chariot both. As on a herd of beeves a lion springs 19s While midst the shrubs they browse, and breaks their necks, — Heifer or ox, — so sprang he on the twain And struck them, vainly struggling, from their car, And spoiled them of their arms, and took their steeds, And bade his comrades lead them to the fleet. *» ^^Sneas, who beheld him scattering thus The embattled ranks before him, straightway went Through the thick fight, amid encountering spears, In search of godlike Pandarus. He found Lycaon's blameless and illustrious son, »0s And stood before him, and addressed him thus : — "Where is thy bow, O Pandarus, and where' Thy winged arrows? Where the old renown In which no warrior here can vie with thee, And none upon the Lycian shore can boast »,« That he excels thee? Hasten, and lift up Thy hands in prayer to Jupiter, and send An arrow at this man, whoe'er he be, Who thus prevails, and thus afflicts our host, And makes the knees of many a strong man weak. Strike him, — unless he be some god incensed «« At Troy for sacrifice withheld, since hard It is to bear the anger of a god."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycaon's son, the far-renowned, replied : — "/Eneas, leader of the Trojans mailed In brass, to me this man in all things seems Like warlike Diomed. I know his shield, High helm, and steeds, and yet I may not say That this is not a god. But if he be The chief of whom I speak, the warlike son Of Tydeus, not thus madly would he fight, Without some god to aid him. By his side Is one of the immortals, with a cloud About his shoulders, turning from its aim The swiftly flying arrow. 'T was but late I aimed a shaft that pierced the hollow mail On his left shoulder, and I thought him sent To Pluto, but I slew him not. Some god Must be offended with me. I have here No steeds or car to mount. Far off at home' There stand within Lycaon's palace-walls Eleven chariots, fair and fresh and new: Each has an ample cover, and by each Are horses yoked in pairs, that champ their oats And their white barley. When I left my home, Lycaon, aged warrior, counselled me, Within his sumptuous halls, that with my steeds And chariot I should lead the sons of Troy In the fierce battle. I obeyed him not: Far better if I had. I wished to spare My horses, lest, so largely fed at home, They might want food in the beleaguered town.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, leaving them, I came on foot to Troy, Confiding in my bow, which yet was doomed To avail me little, for already I Have smitten with my arrows the two chiefs, Tydides and Atrides, and from both Drew the red blood, but only made their rage To flame the fiercer. In an evil hour I took my bow and quiver from the wall And came to lead the Trojans for the sake Of Hector. But if ever I return To see my native country and my wife And my tall spacious mansion, may some foe Strike off my head if with these hands I fail To break my bow in pieces, casting it Into the flames, a useless weapon now." The Trojan chief /Eneas, answering, said :— "Nay, talk not so; it cannot but be thus, Until upon a chariot, and with steeds, We try our prowess with this man in war. Haste, mount my chariot here, and thou shalt see How well are Trojan horses trained to range The field of battle, in the swift pursuit Hither and thither, or in rapid flight; And they shall bring us safely to the town Should Jove a second time bestow the meed Of glory on Tydides. Haste, and take The lash and well-wrought reins, while I descend To fight on foot; or haply thou wilt wait The foe's advance while I direct the steedi."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then spake again Lycaon's eminent son :— "Keep thou the reins, /Eneas, and still guide The horses. With their wonted charioteer, The better shall they bear away the car ^ Should we be forced to fly before the arm Of Diomed; lest, taking flight, they range Unmastered when they hear thy voice no more, Nor bear us from the combat, and the son Of Tydeus, having slain us, shall lead thence Thy firm-hoofed coursers. Therefore guide them still, Them and the chariot, while, with this keen spear, I wait the Greek, as he is rushing on." They spake, and, climbing the magnificent car, Turned toward Tydides the swift-footed steeds. The noble son of Capaneus beheld, And said in winged words to Diomed :— "Tydides Diomed, most dear of men! I see two warriors, strong, immensely strong, Coming to combat with thee. Pandarus ra Is one, the skilled in archery, who boasts To be Lycaon's son ; and by his side There comes JEneas, glorying that he sprang From the large souled Anchises, — borne to him By Venus. Mount we now our car and leave *», The ground, nor in thy fury rush along The van of battle, lest thou lose thy life." The brave Tydides, with a frown, replied : — "Speak not of flight; thou canst not yet persuade My mind to that. To skulk or shrink with fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In battle ill becomes me, and my strength Is unexhausted yet. It suits me not To mount the chariot; I will meet the foe Just as I am. Minerva will not let My spirit falter. Ne'er shall those swift steeds v0 Bear the two warriors hence, — if even one Escapes me. One thing more have I to say; And keep it well in mind. Should Pallas deign — The wise, forecasting Pallas — to bestow On me the glory of o'ercoming both, 31s Stop thy swift horses, and tie fast the reins To our own chariot, and make haste to seize The horses of/Eneas, guiding them Hence from the Trojan to the Grecian host; For they are of the stock which Jupiter The Thunderer gave to Tros. It was the price He paid for Ganymede, and they, of all Beneath the eye of morning and the sun, Are of the choicest breed. The king of men, Anchises, stealthily and unobserved, Brought to the coursers of Laomedon His brood-mare, and obtained the race. Six colts, Their offspring, in his courts were foaled. Of these, Four for himself he kept, and in his stalls Reared them, and two of them, both apt for war, u0 He gave /Eneas. If we make them ours, The exploit will bring us honor and renown." Thus they conferred. Meantime their foes drew near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Urging their fiery coursers on, and first Lycaon's eminent son addressed the Greek :— 33s "My weapon, swift and sharp, the arrow, failed To slay thee ; let me try the javelin now, And haply that, at least, may reach its mark." He spake, and, brandishing his massive spear, Hurled it against the shield of Diomed. 3« The brazen point broke through, and reached the mail. Then shouted with loud voice Lycaon's son : — "Ha! thou art wounded in thy flank; my spear Bites deep; nor long, I think, canst thou survive, And great will be my glory gained from thee." 34s But thus the valiant Diomed replied. Incapable of fear: "Thy thought is wrong. I am not wounded, and I well perceive That ye will never give the conflict o'er Till one of you, laid low amid the dust, ss» Pour out his blood to glut the god of war." He spake, and cast his spear. Minerva kept The weapon faithful to its aim. It struck The nose, and near the eye; then passing on Betwixt the teeth, the unrelenting edge 3ss Cleft at its root the tongue; the point came out Beneath the chin. The warrior from his car. Fell headlong; his bright armor, fairly wrought, Clashed round him as he fell; his fiery steeds Started aside with fright; his breath and strength Were gone at once, /Eneas, with his shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his long spear, leaped down to guard the slain, That the Achaians might not drag him thence. There, lion-like, confiding in his strength, He stalked around the corpse, and over it 3«s Held his round shield and lance, prepared to slay Whoever came, and shouting terribly. Tydides raised a stone, — a mighty weight, Such as no two men living now could lift; But he, alone, could swing it round with ease. ir0 With this he smote /Eneas on the hip, Where the thigh joins its socket. By the blow He brake the socket and the tendons twain, And tore the skin with the rough, jagged stone. The hero fell upon his knees, but stayed 373 His fall with his strong palm upon the ground; And o'er his eyes a shadow came like night. Then had the king of men, /Eneas, died, But for Jove's daughter, Venus, who perceived His danger instantly, — his mother, she 330 Who bore him to Anchises when he kept His beeves, a herdsman. Round her son she cast Her white arms, spreading over him in folds Her shining robe, to be a fence against The weapons of the foe, lest some Greek knight tfs Should at his bosom aim the steel to take His life. And thus the goddess bore away From that fierce conflict her beloved son. Nor did the son of Capaneus forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bidding of the warlike Diomed, sx. But halted his firm-footed steeds apart From the great tumult, with the long reins stretched And fastened to the chariot. Next, he sprang To seize the horses with fair-flowing manes, That drew the chariot of /Eneas. These m He drave away, far from the Trojan host, To the well-greaved Achaians, giving them In charge, to lead them to the hollow ships, To his beloved friend Deipylus, Whom he of all his comrades honored most, «», As likest to himself in years and mind. And then he climbed his car and took the reins, And, swiftly drawn by his firm-footed steeds, Followed Tydides, who with cruel steel Sought Venus, knowing her unapt for war, *,s And all unlike the goddesses who guide The battles of mankind, as Pallas does, Or as Bellona, ravager of towns. O'ertaking her at last, with long pursuit, Amid the throng of warring men, the son 410 Of warlike Tydeus aimed at her his spear, And wounded in her hand the delicate one With its sharp point. It pierced the ambrosial robe, Wrought for her by the Graces, at the spot Where the palm joins the wrist, and broke the skin, And drew immortal blood, — the ichor, — such 4rs As from the blessed gods may flow; for they Eat not the wheaten loaf, nor drink dark wine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore they are bloodless, and are called Immortal. At the stroke the goddess shrieked, **, And dropped her son. Apollo in his arms Received and in a dark cloud rescued him, Lest any of the Grecian knights should aim A weapon at his breast to take his life. Meantime the brave Tydides cried aloud : — 4»s "Leave wars and battle, goddess. Is it not Enough that thou delude weak womankind? Yet, if thou ever shouldst return, to bear A part in battle, thou shalt have good cause To start with fear, when war is only named." «0 He spake; and she departed, wild with pain, For grievously she suffered. Instantly Fleet-footed Iris took her by the hand And led her from the place, her heart oppressed With anguish and her fair cheek deathly pale. 433 She found the fiery Mars, who had withdrawn From that day's combat to the left, and sat, His spear and his swift coursers hid from sight, In darkness. At his feet she fell, and prayed Her brother fervently, that he would lend 4« His steeds that stood in trappings wrought of gold :— "Dear brother, aid me; let me have thy steeds To bear me to the Olympian mount, the home Of gods, for grievously the wound I bear Afflicts me. 'T was a mortal gave the wound, — 44s Tydides, who would even fight with Jove." She spake; and Mars resigned to her his steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With trappings of bright gold. She climbed the car, Still grieving, and, beside her, Iris took Her seat, and caught the reins and plied the lash, no On flew the coursers, on, with willing speed, And soon were at the mansion of the gods On high Olympus. There the active-limbed, Fleet Iris stayed them, loosed them from the car, And fed them with ambrosial food. Meanwhile, 4ss The goddess Venus at Dione's feet Had cast herself. The mother round her child Threw tenderly her arms, and with her hand Caressed her brow, and spake, and thus inquired:— "Which of the dwellers of the skies, dear child, Has dealt thus cruelly with thee, as one Caught in the doing of some flagrant wrong?" And thus did Venus, queen of smiles, reply : — "The son of Tydeus, arrogant Diomed, Wounded me as I sought to bear away ««s From battle's dangers my beloved son ^ineas, dear beyond all other men: For now no longer does the battle rage Between the Greeks and Trojans, but the Greeks Venture to combat even with the gods." «o Dione, great among the goddesses, Rejoined: "Submit, my daughter, and endure, Though inly grieved; for many of us who dwell Upon the Olympian mount have suffered much From mortals, and have brought great miseries Upon each other. First, it was the fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Mars to suffer, when Aloeus' sons, Otus and mighty Ephialtes, made Their fetters fast upon his limbs. He lay Chained thirteen months within a brazen cell; 43o And haply there the god, whose thirst of blood Is never cloyed, had perished, but for aid Which Eriboea gave, the beautiful, His step-mother. She made his miseries known To Mercury, who set him free by stealth, 43s Withered and weak with long imprisonment. And Juno suffered when Amphitryon's son, The valiant, dared to plant in her right breast A three-pronged arrow, and she writhed with pain. And Pluto suffered, when the hero-son «o Of aegis-bearing Jove, with a swift shaft, Smote him beside the portals of the dead. And left him filled with pain. He took his way To high Olympus and the home of Jove, Grieving and racked with pain, for deep the dart m Had pierced his brawny shoulder, torturing him. There Paean with his pain-dispelling balms Healed him, for he was not of mortal race. O daring man and reckless, to make light Of such impieties and violate s90 The sacred persons of the Olympian gods! It was the blue-eyed Pallas who stirred up Tydides to assail thee thus. The fool! He knew not that the man who dares to meet The gods in combat lives not long. No child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall prattling call him father when he comes Returning from the dreadful tasks of war. Let then Tydides, valiant though he be, Beware lest a more potent foe than thou Encounter him, and lest the nobly-born s,» ^igialeia, in some night to come — Wise daughter of Adrastus, and the spouse Of the horse-tamer Diomed — call up The servants of her household from their sleep, Bewailing him to whom in youth she gave sis Her maiden troth, — the bravest of the Greeks." She spake, and wiped the ichor from the hand Of Venus; at her touch the hand was healed And the pain left it. Meantime Pallas stood, With Juno, looking on, both teasing Jove s*, With words of sarcasm. Blue-eyed Pallas thus Addressed the god: "O Father Jupiter, Wilt thou be angry at the word I speak ? — As Venus, wheedling some Achaian dnme To join the host she loves, the sons of Troy, w Caressed the fair, arrayed in gay attire, A golden buckle scratched her tender hand." As thus she spake, the Father of the gods And mortals, calling golden Venus near, Said, with a smile: "Nay, daughter, not for thee s30 Are tasks of war; be gentle marriage-rites Thy care; the labors of the battle-field Pertain to Pallas and the fiery Mars." Thus with each other talked the gods, while still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great in battle, Diomed, pursued s3s /Eneas, though he knew that Phoebus stretched His arm to guard the warrior. Small regard Had he for the great god, and much he longed To strike tineas down and bear away The glorious arms he wore; and thrice he rushed w, To slay the Trojan, thrice Apollo smote Upon his glittering shield. But when he made The fourth assault, as if he were a god, The archer of the skies, Apollo, thus With menacing words rebuked him: "Diomed, ws Beware; desist, nor think to make thyself The equal of a god. The deathless race Of gods is not as those who walk the earth." He spake; the son of Tydeus, shrinking back, Gave way before the anger of the god ss0 Who sends his shafts afar. Then Phoebus bore ^Eneas from the tumult to the height Of sacred Pergamus, where stands his fane; And there Latona and the archer-queen, Diana, in the temple's deep recess, sss Tended him and brought back his glorious strength. Meantime the bowyer-god, Apollo, formed An image of /Eneas, armed like him, Round which the Trojans and Achaians thronged With many a heavy weapon-stroke that fell Upon the huge orbs of their ox-hide shields And lighter bucklers. Now to fiery Mars Apollo spake: "Mars, Mars, thou plague of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou steeped in blood, destroyer of walled towns! 'Wilt thou not force this man to leave the field? s^s Wilt thou not meet in arms this daring son Of Tydeus, who would even fight with Jove? Already has he wounded, in close fight, The goddess Venus at the wrist, and since Assaulted me as if he were a god." s70 He said, and on the heights of Pergamus Sat down, while the destroyer Mars went forth Among the embattled Trojan ranks, to rouse Their valor. In the form of Acamus, The gallant Thracian leader, he bespake s7s The sons of Jove-descended Priam thus : — "O sons of Priam, him who claims descent From Jupiter! how long will ye submit To see your people slaughtered by the Greeks? Is it until the battle-storm shall reach ss0 Your city's stately portals? Even now A hero whom we honor equally With the great Hector, our /Eneas, son Of the large-souled Anchises, is struck down. Haste, let us rescue our beloved friend." ss; He spake, and into every heart his words Carried new strength and courage. In that hour Sarpedon chid the noble Hector thus: — "Where is the prowess, Hector, which was thine So lately? Thou hast said that thou alone, «, Thy kindred and thy brothers, could defend The city, without armies or allies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I see none of these; they all, like hounds Before a lion, crouch and slink away, While the confederates bear the brunt of war. sw I am but an auxiliar come from far, From Lycia, where the eddying Xanthus runs. There left I a beloved wife, and there An infant child, and large possessions, such As poor men covet. Yet do I exhort My Lycians to the combat, and myself Would willingly engage this foe of Troy, Although I here have nothing which the Greeks Might bear or drive away. Thou standest still, Meanwhile, nor dost thou bid the rest to keep a0s Their ground and bear the battle for their wives. Yet have a care, lest, as if caught at length In the strong meshes of a mighty net, Ye find yourselves the captives and the prey Of enemies, who quickly will destroy «io Your nobly-peopled city. These are thoughts That should engage thy mind by night and day, And thou shouldst beg the chiefs of thine allies, Called to thy aid from far, that manfully They meet the foe, and foil his fierce attack, »s And take the cause of this reproach away." Sarpedon spake; and Hector, all in arms, Stung by his words, and leaping from his car, Brandished his spears, and went among the hosts And rallied them to battle. Terrible '*, The conflict that ensued. The men of Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made head against the Greeks: the Greeks stood firm, Nor ever thought of flight. As when the wind Strews chaff about the sacred threshing-floors While wheat is winnowed, and before the breeze i*s The yellow Ceres separates the grain From its light husk, which gathers in white heaps, — Even so the Greeks were whitened o'er with dust Raised in that tumult by the horses' hoofs And rising to the brazen firmament, As toward the fight the charioteers again Urged on their coursers. Yet the Greeks withstood The onset, and struck forward with strong arms. Meantime the furious Mars involved the field In darkness, to befriend the sons of Troy, «3s And went through all the ranks, and well fulfilled The mandate which Apollo gave the god Who wields the golden falchion, bidding him Kindle the courage of the Trojan host Whene'er he saw the auxiliar of the Greeks, «» Minerva, leave the combat. Then the god Brought from the sanctuary's inner shrine /Eneas, — filling with recovered strength That shepherd of the people. He beside His comrades placed himself, and they rejoiced ,»s To see him living and unharmed and strong As ever; yet they questioned not ; their task Was different, set them by the god who bears The silver bow, and Mars the slayer of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And raging Strife that never is appeased. The Ajaces and Ulysses and the son Of Tydeus roused the Achaians to the fight. For of the strength and clamor of the foj They felt no fear, but calmly stood, to bide The assault; as stand in air the quiet clouds «s! Which Saturn's son upon the mountain-tops Piles in still volumes when the north wind sleeps, And every ruder breath of blustering air That drives the gathered vapors through the sky. Thus calmly waited they the Trojan host, «*, Nor thought of flight. And now Atrides passed In haste along their ranks, and gave command : — "O friends, be men, and let your hearts be strong, And let no warrior in the heat of fight Do what may bring him shame in others' eyes; «s For more of those who shrink from shame are safe Than fall in battle, while with those who flee Is neither glory nor reprieve from death." So spake the king, and hurled his spear and smote D.'icoon, the son of Pergasis, «70 A chief, and a companion in the war Of the great-souled /Eneas. He in Troy Was honored as men honored Priam's sons, For he was ever foremost in the fight. «74 The weapon struck his shield, yet stopped not there, But, breaking through its folds and through the belt, Transfixed the part beneath. The Trojan fell To earth, his armor clashing with his fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>tineas slew the sons of Diodes, — Orsilochus and Crethon, eminent Greeks. (*, Their father dwelt in Pherae nobly built, Amid his riches. From Alpheius he Derived his race, — a river whose long stream Flows through the meadows of the Pylian land. Orsilochus was to Alpheius born, «»3 Lord over many men, and he became The father of great Diocles, to whom Twin sons were born, well trained in all the arts Of warfare, — Crethon and Orsilochus. These, in the prime of youth, with their black ships Followed the Argives to the coast of Troy «,, Famed for its generous steeds. They left their hom j To vindicate the honor of the sons Of Atreus,— Agamemnon, king of men, And Menelaus, — but they found their death. «»-, As two young lions, nourished by their dam Amid the thickets of some mighty wood, Seizing the beeves and fattened sheep, lay waste The stables, till at length themselves are slain By trenchant weapons in the shepherd's hand, 790 So by the weapons of /^neas died These twain ; they fell as lofty fir-trees fall. But now, when Menelaus saw their fate, The mighty warrior, deeply sorrowing, rushed Among the foremost, armed in glittering brass, 70s And brandishing his spear; for Mars had roused His soul to fury, trusting he would meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>AEneas, and would perish by his hand. Antilochus, the generous Nestor's son, Came also to the van, for anxiously jio He feared mischance might overtake the king, To make the toils of their long warfare vain; And there he found the combatants prepared For battle, with their trusty spears in hand, And standing face to face. At once he took 71* His stand beside the monarch of the Greeks. At sight of the two warriors side by side, All valiant as he was, /Eneas shunned The encounter. They, when they had drawn the dead Among the Grecian ranks, and to their friends t*, Given up the hapless brothers, turned to take Their place among the foremost in the fight. Then, too, Pykemenes, a chief like Mars, And leader of the Paphlagonian host, — A valiant squadron armed with shields, — was slain. Atrides Menelaus, skilled to wield 7«s The javelin, gave his death-wound. He transfixed The shoulder at the collar-bone. Meanwhile Antilochus against his charioteer, Mydon, the brave son of Atymnias, hurled 730 A stone that smote his elbow as he wheeled His firm-paced steeds in flight. He dropped the reins, Gleaming with ivory as they trailed in dust. Antilochus leaped forward, smiting him Upon the temples with his sword. He fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gasping amidst the sand, his head immersed Up to his shoulders, — for the sand was deep, — And there remained till he was beaten down Before the horses' hoofs. Antilochus, Lashing the horses, drave them to the Greeks. 7* Hector beheld, and, springing with loud shouts, Stood mid the wavering ranks. The phalanxes Of the brave Trojans followed him, for Mars And terrible Bellona led them on, — Bellona bringing Tumult in her train, 74s And Mars with brandished lance — a mighty weight — Now stalking after Hector, now before. Him when the valiant Diomed beheld, He trembled; and, as one who, journeying Along a way he knows not, having crossed 7s0 A place of drear extent, before him sees A river rushing swiftly toward the deep, And all its tossing current white with foam, And stops and turns, and measures back his way, So then djd Diomed withdraw, and spake :— 7ss u O friends, how greatly must we all admire This noble Hector, mighty with the spear And terrible in war. There is some god Forever near him, warding off the stroke Of death ; beside him yonder even now 7«° Stands Mars in semblance of a mortal man. Yield, then, and with your faces toward the foe Fall back, and strive not with the gods of heaven."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as he spake, the Trojan host drew near, And Hector slew two warriors trained to arms, — Menesthes and Anchialus,—who came Both in one chariot to the war. Their fall Ajax, the son of Telamon, beheld, And pitied, and drew near, and stood, and hurled His glittering spear. It smote Ampheius, son no Of Selagus, who, rich in lands and goods, Abode in Paesus. In an evil hour He joined the cause of Priam and his sons. Him at the belt the spear of Ajax smote, And pierced the bowels. With a crash he fell, vs Then hastened mighty Ajax to strip off The armor, but the Trojans at him cast Their pointed spears that glittered as they flew, And many struck his shield. He pressed his heel Against the slain, and from the body drew 7*, His brazen spear, but could not from the breast Loose the bright mail, so thick the weapons came, And such the wary dread with which he saw The bravest of the Trojans closing round, t* Many and fierce, and all with spears outstretched; And he, though strong and valiant and renowned, Driven from the ground, gave way to mightier force. So toiled the warriors through that stubborn fight, When cruel fate urged on Tlepokmus, The great and valiant son of Hercules, no To meet Sarpedon, mighty as a god. And now as each to each advanced, — the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grandson of the cloud-compeller Jove, — Thus first Tlepolemus addressed his foe : —- "Sarpedon, Lycian monarch, what has brought 79s Thee hither, trembling thus, and inexpert In battle? Lying flatterers are they That call thee son of Jupiter who bears The aegis; for unlike the heroes thou, Born to the Thunderer in times of old, Nor like my daring father, Hercules The lion-hearted, who once came to Troy To cl aim the coursers of Laomedon. With but six ships, and warriors but a few, He laid the city waste and made its streets «0s A desolation. Thou art weak of heart, And round thee are thy people perishing; Yet, even wert thou brave, thy presence here From Lycia's coast would prove of small avail To Troy; for, slain in combat here by me, Thou to the gates of Hades shalt go down." Sarpedon, leader of the Lycians, thus Made answer: "True it is, Tlepolemus, That he laid waste the sacred city of Troy For the base dealings of Laomedon, biS The monarch who with railing words repaid His great deservings, and kept back the steeds For which he came so far. But thou — thy fate Is slaughter and black death from this my spear; And fame will come to me, and one more soul b*, Go down to Hades." As Sarpedon spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tlepolemus upraised his ashen spear, And from the hands of both the chiefs at once Their massive weapons flew. Sarpedon smote Full in the throat his foe; the cruel point «3s Passed through the neck, and night came o'er his eyes. Tlepolemus, in turn, on the left thigh Had struck Sarpedon with his ponderous lance. The weapon, cast with vigorous hand and arm, Pierced deep, and touched the bone ; but Jupiter »30 Averted from his son the doom of death. His noble comrades raised and bore away The great Sarpedon from the battle-field, Trailing the long spear with them. Bitter pain It gave him ; in their haste they marked it not, «ss Nor thought to draw the ashen weapon forth, That he might mount the car ; so eagerly His anxious bearers hurried from the war. On the other side the well-armed Greeks took up The slain Tlepolemus, to bear him thence. «« The great Ulysses, large of soul, beheld, And felt his spirit moved, as anxiously He pondered whether to pursue the son Of Jove the Thunderer, or turn and take The life of many a Lycian. Yet to slay C4s Jove's mighty son was not his destiny, And therefore Pallas moved him to engage The crowd of Lycian warriors. Then he slew Coeranus and Alastor, Chromius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alcander, Halius, and Prytanis «30 Noemon; and yet more the noble Greek Had slain, if crested Hector, mighty chief, Had not perceived the havoc and, arrayed In shining armor, hurried to the van Of battle, carrying terror to the hearts »5s Of the Achaians. As he saw him near, Sarpedon was rejoiced, yet sadly said :— "O son of Priam, leave me not a prey To these Achaians. Aid me, let me breathe My latest breath in Troy, since I no more ««0 Can hope, returning to my native land, To gladden my dear wife and little son." He spake, and crested Hector answered not, Still pressing forward, eager to drive back The Greeks in quick retreat, and take the life «s Of many a foe. Then did the noble band Who bore the great Sarpedon lay him down Beneath a shapely beech, a tree of Jove The /Egis-bearer. There stout Pelagon, His well-beloved comrade, from his thigh s7o Drew forth the sharp blade of the ashen spear. Then the breath left him, and his eyes were closed In darkness ; but the light came back again As, breathing over him, the fresh north wind Revived the spirit in his laboring breast. «7s But not for Mars nor Hector mailed in brass Fled the Achaians to their fleet; nor yet Advanced they on the foe, but step by step</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave way before him, for they had perceived The god of war was with the sons of Troy. sk, Whom first, whom last did Hector, Priam's son, And iron Mars lay low? The godlike chief Teuthras, and — great among the Grecian knights— Orestes, and the /Etolian Trechus, famed As spearman, and Ginomaus, and the son Of Ginops, Helemes, and after these Belted Oresbius, who in Hyla made His home, intent on gathering wealth beside The Lake Cephissus, on whose borders dwelt Boeotians many, lords of fertile lands. a*. The white-armed goddess Juno, when she saw The Argives falling in that cruel fray, Addressed Minerva with these winged words :— "O thou unconquerable goddess, born To Jove the /Egis-bearer! what is this? *h It was an idle promise that we made To Menelaus, that he should behold Troy, with its strong defences, overthrown, And reach his home again, if thus we leave Mars the destroyer to his ravages. *» Come, let us bring our friends effectual aid." So spake she, and her bidding was obeyed By blue-eyed Pallas. Juno the august, Daughter of mighty Saturn, laid in haste The harness, with its ornaments of gold, w Upon the horses. Hebe rolled the wheels, Each with eight spokes, and joined them to th£ ends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the steel axle, — fellies wrought of gold, Bound with a brazen rim to last for aye, — A wonder to behold. The hollow naves 910 Were silver, and on gold and silver cords Was slung the chariot's seat; in silver hooks Rested the reins, and silver was the pole Where the fair yoke and poitrels, all of gold, Were fastened. Juno, eager for the strife, w Led the swift-footed steeds beneath the yoke. Then Pallas, daughter of the god who bears The aegis, on her father's palace-floor Let fall in dainty folds her flowing robe Of many colors, wrought by her own hand, 9™ And, putting on the mail of Jupiter The Cloud-compeller, stood arrayed in arms For the stern tasks of war. Her shoulder bore The dreadful aegis with its shaggy brim Bordered with Terror. There was Strife, and there Was Fortitude, and there was fierce Pursuit, v* And there the Gorgon's head, a ghastly sight, Deformed and dreadful, and a sign of woe When borne by Jupiter. Upon her head She placed a golden helmet with four crests «*, And fair embossed, of strength that might withstand The armed battalions of a hundred towns; Then stepped into her shining car, and took Her massive spear in hand, heavy and huge, With which whole ranks of heroes are o'erthrown ,ns Before the daughter of the Mighty One</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incensed against them. Juno swung the lash And swiftly urged the steeds. Before their way, On sounding hinges, of their own accord, Flew wide the gates of heaven, which evermore «*, The Hours are watching,—they who keep the mount Olympus and the mighty heaven, with power To open or to close their cloudy veil. Thus through the gates they drave the obedient steeds, And found Saturnius, where he sat apart 943 From other gods, upon the loftiest height Of many-peaked Olympus. Juno there, The white-armed goddess, stayed her chariot-wheels, And, thus accosting Jove, she questioned him :— "O Father Jupiter, does not thy wrath 9s0 Rise at those violent deeds of Mars? Thou seest How many of the Achaians he has slain, And what brave men. Nay, thus it should not be. Great grief is mine ; but Venus and the god Phoebus, who bears the silver bow, rejoice 9s? To see this lawless maniac range the field, And urge him on. O Father Jupiter, Wilt thou be angry with me if I drive Mars, sorely wounded, from the battle-field?" The cloud-compelling Jupiter replied :— 9«0 "Thou hast my leave ; but send to encounter him Pallas the spoiler, who has many a time Brought grievous troubles on the god of war." He spake, and white-armed Juno instantfy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obeyed him. With the scourge she lashed the steeds, And not unwillingly they flew between s« Earth and the starry heaven. As much of space As one who gazes on the dark-blue deep Sees from the headland summit where he sits — Such space the coursers of immortal breed 970 Cleared at each bound they made with sounding hoofs; And when they came to Ilium and its streams, Where Simois and Scamander's channels meet, The white-armed goddess Juno stayed their speed, And loosed them from the yoke, and covered them With darkness. Simois ministered, meanwhile, 97« The ambrosial pasturage on which they fed. On went the goddesses, with step as light As timid doves, and hastened toward the field To aid the Achaian army. When they came Where fought the bravest warriors in a throng Around the great horse-tamer Diomed, Like ravenous lions or wild boars whose rage Is terrible, the white-armed goddess stood, And called aloud, — for now she wore the form 9ss Of gallant Stentor, in whose brazen voice Was heard a shout like that of fifty men :— "Shame on you, Argives, — wretches, who in form, And form alone, are heroes. While we yet Had great Achilles in the war, the men w Of Ilium dared not pass beyond their gates, So much they feared his mighty spear; but now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They push the battle to our hollow ships, Far from the town." As thus the goddess spake, New strength and courage woke in every breast. 99s Then blue-eyed Pallas hastened to the son Of Tydeus. By his steeds she found the king, And by his chariot, as he cooled the wound Made by the shaft of Pandarus. The sweat Beneath the ample band of his round shield Had weakened him, and weary was his arm. He raised the band, and from the wounded limb Wiped off the clotted blood. The goddess laid Her hand upon the chariot-yoke, and said :— "Tydeus hath left a son unlike himself; 100i For he, though low in stature, was most brave; And when he went, an envoy and alone, To Thebes, the populous Cadmean town, And I, enjoining him to keep aloof From wars and rash encounters, bade him sit Quietly at the feasts in palace-halls, Still, to his valiant temper true, he gave Challenges to the Theban youths, and won The prize with ease in all their games, such aid I gave him. Now I stand by thee in turn, "»3 Protect thee, and exhort thee minfully To fight against the Trojans ; but to-day Either the weariness of toil unnerves Thy frame, or withering fear besets thy heart. Henceforth we cannot deem thee, as of late, The offspring of (Enides skilled in war."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the valiant Diomed replied : — "I know thee, goddess, daughter of great Jove The ^Egis-bearer; therefore will I speak Freely and keep back nothing. No base fear 102s Unmans me, nor desire of ease ; but well I bear in mind the mandate thou hast given. Thou didst forbid me to contend with gods, Except that if Jove's daughter, Venus, joined The battle, I might wound her with my spear. i030 But now I have withdrawn, and given command That all the Greeks come hither; for I see That Mars is in the field and leads the war." Again the blue-eyed Pallas, answering, said :-— "Tydides Diomed, most dear of men, '03s Nay, fear thou nothing from this Mars, nor yet From any other of the gods ; for I Will be thy sure defence. First urge thy course Full against Mars, with thy firm-footed steeds. Engage him hand to hand; respect him not, — «• The fiery, frantic Mars, the unnatural plague Of man, the fickle god, who promised me And Juno, lately, to take part with us Against the Trojans and befriend the Greeks. Now he forgets, and joins the sons of Troy." •ms She spake, and laid her hand on Sthenelus, To draw him from the horses; instantly He leaped to earth; the indignant deity Took by the side of Diomed her place; The beechen axle groaned beneath the weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that great goddess and that man of might. Then Pallas seized the lash and caught the reins, And, urging the firm-footed coursers, drave Full against Mars, who at that moment slew Huge Periphas, the mightiest one of all .0ss The ^itolian band, — Ochesius' famous son. While bloody-handed Mars was busy yet About the slain, Minerva hid her face In Pluto's helmet, that the god might fail To see her. As that curse of humankind 10«0 Beheld the approach of noble Diomed, He left the corpse of Periphas unspoiled Where he had fallen, and where he breathed his last, And came in haste to meet the Grecian knight. And now, when they were near, and face to face,i,*s Mars o'er the chariot-yoke and horses' reins First hurled his brazen spear, in hope to take His enemy's life; but Pallas with her hand Caught it and turned it, so that it flew by And gave no wound. The valiant Diomed •«!» Made with his brazen spear the next assault, And Pallas guided it to strike the waist Where girded by the baldric. In that part She wounded Mars, and tore the shining skin, And drew the weapon back. The furious god wb Uttered a cry as of nine thousand men, Or of ten thousand, rushing to the fight. The Greeks and Trojans stood aghast with fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear that terrible cry of him whose thirst Of bloodshed never is appeased by blood. «*, As when, in time of heat, the air is filled With a black shadow from the gathering clouds And the strong-blowing wind, so furious Mars Appeared to Diomed, as in a cloud He rose to the broad heaven and to the home k*s Of gods on high Olympus. Near to Jove He took his seat in bitter grief, and showed The immortal blood still dropping from his wound, And thus, with winged words, complaining said : — "O Father Jupiter! does not thy wrath ,«-0 Rise at these violent deeds? *T is ever thus That we, the gods, must suffer grievously From our own rivalry in favoring man; And yet the blame of all this strife is thine, For thou hast a mad daughter, ever wrong, IO}s And ever bent on mischief. AH the rest Of the immortals dwelling on this mount Obey thee and are subject to thy will. Her only thou hast never yet restrained By word or act, but dost indulge her freaks Because the pestilent creature is thy child. And now she moves the insolent Diomed To raise his hand against the immortal gods. And first he wounded Venus in the wrist, Contending hand to hand ; and then he sought nos To encounter me in arms, as if he were The equal of a god. My own swift feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Carried me thence, else might I long have lain, In anguish, under heaps of carcasses, Or helplessly been mangled by his sword." mo The Cloud-compeller, Jove, replied, and frowned: "Come not to me, thou changeling, to complain. Of all the gods upon the Olympian mount I like thee least, who ever dost delight In broils and wars and battles. Thou art like n,s Thy mother Juno, headstrong and perverse. Her I can scarcely rule by strict commands, And what thou sufferest now, I deem, is due To her bad counsels. Yet't is not my will That thou shouldst suffer longer, who dost share u*, My lineage, whom thy mother bore to me. But wert thou born, destroyer as thou art, To any other god, thou hadst long since Lain lower than the sons of Uranus." So spake he, and to Paeon gave command n»s To heal the wound ; and Paeon bathed the part With pain-dispelling balsams, and it healed; For Mars was not to die. As, when the juice Of figs is mingled with white milk and stirred, The liquid gathers into clots while yet »v It whirls with the swift motion, so was healed The wound of violent Mars. Then Hebe bathed The god, and robed him richly, and he took His seat, delighted, by Saturnian Jove. Now, having forced the curse of nations. Mars, To pause from slaughter, Argive Juno came, With Pallas, her invincible ally, liack to the mansion of imperial Jove.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
