<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 23</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"/>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-23" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>SO mourned they in the city; but the Greeks, When they had reached the fleet and Helles- pont, Dispersed, repairing each one to his ship, Save that Achilles suffered not his band Of Myrmidons to part in disarray. s And thus the chief enjoined his warrior friends :— "Myrmidons, gallant knights, my cherished friends! Let us not yet unyoke our firm-paced steeds, But bring them with the chariots, and bewail Patroclus with the honors due the dead, ,» And, when we have indulged in grief, release Our steeds and take our evening banquet here." He spake, and led by him the host broke forth In lamentation. Thrice around the dead, Weeping, they drave their steeds with stately manes, While Thetis in their hearts awoke the sense ,« Of hopeless loss; their tears bedewed the sands, And dropped upon their arms, so brave was he For whom they sorrowed. Peleus' son began The mourning; on the breast of his dead friend » He placed his homicidal hands, and said :— "Hail thou, Patroclus, even amid the shades! For now shall I perform what once I vowed: Page 282 282 The Iliad. That, dragging Hector hither, I will give His corse to dogs, and they shall rend his flesh; »s And at thy funeral pile there shall be slain Twelve noble Trojan youths, to avenge thy death." So spake he, meditating outrages To noble Hector's corse, which he had flung Beside the bier of Menoetiades, 30 Amid the dust. The Myrmidons unbraced Their shining brazen armor, and unyoked Their neighing steeds, and sat in thick array Beside the ship of swift /Eacides, While he set forth a sumptuous funeral feast. s Many a white ox, that day, beneath the axe Fell to the earth, and many bleating goats And sheep were slain, and many fattened swine, White-toothed, were stretched to roast before the flame Of Vulcan, and around the corse the earth «. Floated with blood. Meantime the Grecian chiefs To noble Agamemnon's royal tent Led the swift son of Peleus, though he went Unwillingly, such anger for the death Of his companion burned within his heart. 4s As soon as they had reached his tent, the king Bade the clear-throated heralds o'er the fire Place a huge tripod, that Pelides there Might wash away the bloody stains he bore. Yet would he not, and with an oath replied :— s0 "No! by the greatest and the best of gods, Page 283 Book XXIII. 283 By Jupiter, I may not plunge my head Into the bath before I lay my friend Patroclus on the fire, and heap his mound, And till my hair is shorn; for never more ss In life will be so great a sorrow mine. But now attend we to this mournful feast . And with the morn, O king of men, command That wood be brought, and all things duly done Which may beseem a warrior who goes down «0 Into the lower darkness. Let the flamec Seize fiercely and consume him from our sight, And leave the people to the tasks of war." He spake; they hearkened and obeyed, and all Prepared with diligent hands the meal, and each «* Sat down and took his portion of the feast. And when their thirst and hunger were allayed, Most to their tents betook them and to rest. But Peleus' son, lamenting bitterly, Lay down among his Myrmidons, beside v The murmuring ocean, in the open space, Where plashed the billows on the beach. And there, When slumber, bringing respite from his cares, Came softly and enfolded him, — for much His shapely limbs were wearied with the chase is Of Hector round the windy Ilium's walls,— The soul of his poor friend Patroclus came, Like him in all things,—stature, beautiful eyes, And voice, and garments which he wore in life. Page 284 284 The llia.i. Beside his head the vision stood and spake :— "Achilles, sleepest thou, forgetting me? Never of me unmindful in my life, Thou dost neglect me dead. O, bury me Quickly, and give me entrance through the gates Of Hades; for the souls, the forms of those Who live no more, repulse me, suffering not That I should join their company beyond The river, and I now must wander round The spacious portals of the House of Death. Give me thy hand, I pray; for never more Shall I return to earth when once the fire Shall have consumed me. Never shall we take Counsel together, living, as we sit Apart from our companions; the hard fate Appointed me at birth hath drawn me down. Thou too, O godlike man, wilt fall beneath The ramparts of the noble sons of Troy. Yet this I ask, and if thou wilt obey, This I command thee, — not to let my bones Be laid apart from thine. As we were reared , Under thy roof together, from the time When first Menoetius brought thee, yet a boy, From Opus, where I caused a sorrowful death ; — For by my hand, when wrangling at the dice, Another boy, son of Amphidamas, » Was slain without design, — and Peleus made His halls my home, and reared me tenderly, And made me thy companion ; — so at last Page 285 Book XXIII. 285 May one receptacle, the golden vase Given by thy gracious mother, hold our bones." no The swift Achilles answered: "O most loved And honored, wherefore art thou come, and why Dost thou command me thus? I shall fulfil Obediently thy wish; yet draw thou near, And let us give at least a brief embrace, ns And so indulge our grief." He said, and stretched His longing arms to clasp the shade. In vain; Away like smoke it went, with gibbering cry, Down to the earth. Achilles sprang upright, Astonished, clapped his hands, and sadly said : — ,*, "Surely there dwell within the realm below Both soul and form, though bodiless. All night Hath stood the spirit of my hapless friend Patroclus near me, sad and sorrowful, And asking many duties at my hands, i»s A marvellous semblance of the living man." He spake, and moved the hearts of all to grief And lamentation. Rosy-fingered Morn Dawned on them as around the hapless dead They stood and wept. Then Agamemnon sent ,», In haste from all the tents the mules and men To gather wood, and summoned to the task Meriones, himself a gallant chief, Attendant on the brave Idomeneus. These went with woodmen's axes and with ropes 13s Well twisted, and before them went the mules. O'er steep, o'er glen, by straight, by winding ways, Page 286 286 The Iliad. They journeyed till they reached the woodland wilds Of Ida fresh with springs, and quickly felled With the keen steel the towering oaks that came Crashing to earth. Then, splitting the great trunk. They bound them on the mules, that beat the earth With hasty footsteps through the tangled wood, Impatient for the plain. Each woodcutter Shouldered a tree, for so Meriones, Companion of the brave Idomeneus, Commanded, and at last they laid them down In order on the shore, where Peleus' son Planned that a mighty sepulchre should rise Both for his friend Patroclus and himself. is0 So brought they to the spot vast heaps of wood, And sat them down, a numerous crowd. But then Achilles bade his valiant Myrmidons Put on their brazen mail and yoke their steeds. At once they rose, and put their harness on, « And they who fought from chariots climbed their seats With those who reined the steeds. These led the van, And after them a cloud of men on foot By thousands followed. In the midst was borne Patroclus by his comrades. Cutting off «• Their hair, they strewed it, covering the dead. Behind the corpse, Achilles in his hands Sustained the head, and wept, for on that day He gave to Hades his most cherished friend. Page 287 Book XXIII. 2*7 Now when they reached the spot which Pelcus' son ,«3 Had chosen, they laid down the dead, and piled The wood-around him, while the swift of foot, The great Achilles, bent on other thoughts, Standing apart, cut off his amber hair, Which for the river Sperchius he had long 170 Nourished to ample growth, and, sighing, turned His eyes upon the dark-blue sea, and said :— "Sperchius, in vain my father made a vow That I, returning to my native shore, Should bring my hair, an offering to thee, 17s And slay a consecrated hecatomb, And burn a sacrifice of fifty rams, Beside the springs where in a sacred field Thy fragrant altar stands. Such was the vow Made by the aged man, yet hast thou not i*. Fulfilled his wish. And now, since I no more Shall see my native land, the land I love, Let the slain hero bear these locks away." He spake, and in his dear companion's hands He placed the hair, and all around were moved 13s To deeper grief; the setting sun had left The host lamenting, had not Peleus' son Addressed Atrides, standing at his side : — "Atrides, thou whose word the Greeks obey Mcst readily, all mourning has an end. ,io Dismiss the people from the pyre to take Their evening meal, while we with whom it rests Page 288 288 The Iliad. To pay these mournful duties to the dead Will close the rites; but let the chiefs remain.** This when the monarch Agamemnon heard, Instantly he dismissed to their good ships The people. They who had the dead in charge Remained, and heaped the wood, and built a pyre A hundred feet each way from side to side. ,» With sorrowful hearts they raised and laid the corse Upon the summit. Then they flayed and dressed Before it many fatlings of the flock, And oxen with curved feet and crooked horns. From these magnanimous Achilles took The fat, and covered with it carefully « The dead from head to foot. Beside the bier, And leaning toward it, jars of honey and oil He placed, and flung, with many a deep-drawn sigh. Twelve high-necked steeds upon the pile. Nine hounds There were, which from the table of the prince Were daily fed; of these Achilles struck The heads from two, and laid them on the wood, And after these, and last, twelve gallant sons Of the brave Trojans, butchered by the sword; For he was bent on evil. To the pile «s He put the iron violence of fire, And, wailing, called by name the friend he loved :— "Rejoice, Patrochis, even in the land Of souls. Lo! I perform the vow I made; Twelve gallant sons of the brave men of Troy »» Page 289 Book XXIII. 289 The fire consumes with thee. For Hector's corse, The flames shall not devour it, but the dogs." Such was his threat; but Hector was not made The prey of dogs, for Venus, born to Jove, Drave off by night and day the ravenous tribe, «s And with a rosy and ambrosial oil Anointed him, that he might not be torn When dragged along the earth. Above the spot And all around it, where the body lay, Phoebus Apollo drew a veil of clouds 3*, Reaching from heaven, that on his limbs the flesh And sinews might not stiffen in the sun. The flame seized not upon the funeral pile Of the dead chief. Pelides, swift of foot, Bethought him of another rite. He stood »3s Apart, and offered vows to the two winds, '•- Boreas and Zephyr. Promising to bring Fair offerings to their shrines, and pouring out Libations from a golden cup, he prayed That they would haste and wrap the pile in flames, And burn the dead to ashes. At his prayer mi Fleet Iris on a message to the Winds Took instant wing. They sat within the halls Of murmuring Zephyr, at a solemn feast. There Iris lighted on the threshold-stone. «s As soon as they beheld her, each arose And bade her sit beside him. She refused To seat her at the banquet, and replied :— "Not now; for I again must take my way VOI. 11. 13 8 Page 290 290 The Iliad. Over the ocean currents to the land Where dwell the /Ethiopians, who adore The gods with hecatombs, to take my share Of sacrifice. Achilles supplicates, With promise of munificent offerings, Boreas and sounding Zephyrus to come «ss And blow the funeral structure into flames On which, bewailed by all the Grecian host, Patroclus lies, and waits to be consumed." So spake she, and departed. Suddenly Arose the Winds with tumult, driving on The clouds before them. Soon they reached die deep; Beneath the violence of their sounding breath The billows heaved. They swept the fertile fields Of Troas, and descended on the pyre, And mightily it blazed with fearful roar. *ss All night they howled and tossed the flames. All night Stood swift Achilles, holding in his hand A double beaker; from a golden jar He dipped the wine, and poured it forth, and steeped The earth around, and called upon the soul *70 Of his unhappy friend. As one laments A newly married son upon whose corse The flames are feeding, and whose death has made His parents wretched, so did Peleus' son, Burning the body of his comrade, mourn, «73 As round the pyre he moved with frequent sighs. Page 291 Book XXIII. 291 Now when the star that ushers in the day Appeared, and after it the morning, clad In saffron robes, had overspread the sea, The pyre sank wasted, and the flames arose *, No longer, and the Winds, departing, flew Homeward across the Thracian sea, which tossed And roared with swollen billows as they went. And now Pelides from the pyre apart Weary lay down, and gentle slumber soon s Came stealing over him. Meantime the Greeks Gathered round Agamemnon, and the stir And bustle of their coming woke the chief, Who sat upright and thus addressed his friends :— "Atrides, and all ye who lead the hosts »» Of Greece! our task is, first to quench the pyre With dark red wine where'er the flames have spread, And next to gather, with discerning care, The bones of Menoetiades. And these May well be known; for in the middle space »n He lay, and round about him, and apart Upon the border, were the rest consumed, — The bodies of the captives and the steeds. Be his enclosed within a golden vase, And wrapped around with caul, a double fold, *» Till I too pass into the realm of Death. And be a tomb not over-spacious reared, But of becoming size, which afterward Ye whom we leave behind in our good ships, When we are gone, will build more broad and high." Page 292 The Iliad. So spake the swift Pelides, and the chiefs Complied; and first they quenched with dark red wine The pyre, where'er the flames had spread, and where Lay the deep ashes; then, with many tears, Gathered the white bones of their gentle friend, 3.0 And laid them in a golden vase, wrapped round With caul, a double fold. Within the tents They placed them softly, wrapped in delicate lawn, Then drew a circle for the sepulchre, And, laying its foundations to enclose vs The pyre, they heaped the earth, and, having reared A mound, withdrew. Achilles yet detained The multitude, and made them all sit down, A vast assembly. From the ships he brought The prizes,—caldrons, tripods, steeds, and mules, Oxen in sturdy pairs, and graceful maids, And shining steel. Then for the swiftest steeds A princely prize he offered first, — a maid Of peerless form, and skilled in household arts, And a two-handled tripod of a size s»s For two-and-twenty measures. He gave out The second prize, — a mare unbroken yet, Of six years old, and pregnant with a mule. For the third winner in the race he staked A caldron that had never felt the fire, Holding four measures, beautiful, and yet Untarnished. For the fourth, he offered gold, Two talents. For the fifth, and last, remained Page 293 Book XXIII. 293 A double vessel never touched by fire. He rose and stood, and thus addressed the Greeks : — us "Atrides, and ye other well-armed Greeks, These prizes lie within the chariot-course, And wait the charioteers. Were but these games In honor of another, then would I Contend, and win and carry to my tent 340 The first among these prizes. For my steeds, Ye know, surpass the rest in speed, since they Are of immortal birth, by Neptune given To Peleus, and by him in turn bestowed On me his son. But I and they will keep sis Aloof; they miss their skilful charioteer, Who washed in limpid water from the fount Their manes, and moistened them with softening oil. And now they mourn their friend, and sadly stand With drooping heads and manes that touch the ground. 3s0 Let such of you as trust in their swift steeds And their strong cars prepare to join the games." Pelides spake: the abler charioteers Arose, and, first of all, the king of men, Eumelus, eminent in horsemanship, 3ss The dear son of Admetus. Then arose The valiant son of Tydeus, Diomed, And led beneath the yoke the Trojan steeds Won from ^Eneas when Apollo saved That chief from death. The son of Atreus next, 3*, Page 294 294 The Iliad. The noble Menelaus, yellow-haired, Brought two swift coursers underneath the yoke, King Agamemnon's ^b;the, and with her His own Podargus. Kchepolus once, Anchises' son, sent ^fithfc as a gift To Agamemnon, that he might be free From following with the army to the heights Of Ilium, and enjoy the ease he loved; For Jove had given him wealth, and he abode On Sicyon's plains. Now, eager for the race, She took the yoke. Antilochus, the fourth, The gallant son of the magnanimous king, Neleian Nestor, harnessed next his steeds With stately manes. Swift coursers that were foaled At Pylus drew his chariot. To his side as His father came and stood, and spake and gave Wise counsels, though the youth himself was wise :— "Antilochus, I cannot doubt that Jove And Neptune both have loved thee, teaching thee, Young as thou art, all feats of horsemanship. #0 Small is the need to instruct thee. Thou dost know Well how to turn the goal, and yet thy steeds Are slow, and ill for thee may be the event. Their steeds are swift, yet have they never learned To govern them with greater skill than thou. s*s Now then, dear son, bethink thee heedfully Of all precautions, lest thou miss the prize. By skill the woodman, rather than by strength, Brings down the oak; by skill the pilot guides Page 295 Book XXIII. 295 His wind-tossed galley over the dark sea; 390 And thus by skill the charioteer o'ercomes His rival. He who trusts too much his steeds And chariot lets them veer from side to side Along the course, nor keeps a steady rein Straight on, while one expert in horsemanship, 39s Though drawn by slower horses, carefully Observes the goal, and closely passes it, Nor fails to know how soon to turn his course, Drawing the leathern reins, and steadily Keeps on, and watches him who goes before. *» Now must I show the goal which, easily Discerned, will not escape thine eye. It stands An ell above the ground, a sapless post, Of oak or larch, — a wood of slow decay By rain, and at its foot on either side *s Lies a white stone; there narrow is the way, But level is the race-course all around. The monument it is of one long dead, Or haply it has been in former days A goal, as the swift-footed Peleus' son 4«, Has now appointed it. Approach it near, Driving thy chariot close upon its foot, Then in thy seat lean gently to the left And cheer the right-hand horse, and ply the lash, And give him a loose rein, yet firmly keep 41s The left-hand courser close beside the goal, — So close that the wheel's nave may seem to touch The summit of the post; yet strike thou not Page 296 296 The Iliad. The stone beside it, lest thou lame thy steeds And break the chariot, to thy own disgrace «s And laughter of the others. My dear son, Be on thy guard; for if thou pass the goal Before the rest, no man in the pursuit Can overtake or pass thee, though he drave The noble courser of Adrastus, named 4» Arion the swift-footed, which a god Bade spring to life, or those of matchless speed - Reared here in Ilium by Laomedon." Neleian Nestor spake, and, having thus Given all the needful cautions, took his seat «*, In his own place. Meriones, the fifth, Harnessed his steeds with stately manes, and all Mounted their chariots. Lots were cast; the son Of Peleus shook the helmet, and the lot Of Nestor's son, Antilochus, leaped forth; 43s And next the lot of King Eumelus came; And Menelaus, mighty with the spear, Had the third lot; Meriones was next; And to the bravest of them all, the son Of Tydeus, fell the final lot and place. +» They stood in order, while Achilles showed The goal far off upon the level plain, And near it, as the umpire of the race, He placed the godlike Phoenix, who had been His father's armor-bearer, to observe «s With judging eye, and bring a true report. All raised at once the lash above their steeds, Page 297 Book XXIII. 297 \nd smote them with the reins, and cheered them on With vehement cries. Across the plain they swept, Far from the fleet; beneath them rose the dust, 4s0 A cloud, a tempest, and their tossing manes Were lifted by the wind. And now the cars Touched earth, and now were flung into the air. Erect the drivers stood, with beating hearts, Eager for victory, each encouraging 4ss His steeds, that flew beneath the shroud of dust. But when they turned their course, and swiftly ran Back to the hoary deep to close the' course, Well did the skill of every chief appear. They put their horses to the utmost speed, 4, And then did the quick-footed steeds that drew Eumelus bear him on beyond the rest. But with his Trojan coursers Diomed Came next, so near it seemed that they would mount The car before them, and upon the back. 4«s And ample shoulders of Eumelus smote Their steaming breath; for as they ran their heads Leaned over him. And then would Diomed Have passed him by, or would at least have made The victory doubtful, had not Phoebus struck, »0 In his displeasure, from the hero's hand The shining scourge. It fell, and to his eyes Started indignant tears; for now he saw The others gaining on him, while the speed Of his own steeds, which feared the lash no more, 47s Was slackened. Yet Apollo's stratagem i3• Page 298 298 The Iliad. Was not unseen by Pallas, who o'ertook The shepherd of the people, and restored The scourge he dropped, and put into his steeds New spirit. In her anger she approached «•, Eumelus, snapped his yoke, and caused his mares To start asunder from the track; the pole Was dashed into the ground, and from the seat The chief was flung beside the wheel, his mouth, Elbows, and nostrils torn, his forehead bruised. *s Grief filled his eyes with tears and choked his voice, While Diomed drave by his firm-paced steeds, Outstripping all the rest; for Pallas nerved Their limbs with vigor, and bestowed on him Abundant glory. After him the son Of Atreus, fair-haired Menelaus, came, While Nestor's son cheered on his father's steeds :— "On, on! press onward with your utmost speed! Not that I bid you strive against the steeds Of warlike Diomed, for Pallas gives «s Swiftness to them and glory to the man Who holds the reins; but let us overtake The horses of Atrides, nor submit • To be thus distanced, lest the victory Of the mare /Ethe cover you with shame. s~ Fleet as ye are, why linger? This at least I tell you, and my words will be fulfilled: Look not for kindly care at Nestor's hands, That shepherd of the people, but for death With the sharp steel, if through your fault we take m Page 299 Book XXIII. 299 A meaner prize. Then onward and away, With all your strength, for this is my design, — To pass by Menelaus where the way Is narrow, and he cannot thwart my plan." He spake, and they who feared their master's threat s™ Mended their speed awhile. The warlike son Of Nestor saw just then the narrow pass Within the hollow way, a furrow ploughed By winter floods, which there had torn the course And deepened it. Atrides, to avoid sis The clash of wheels, drave thither; thither too Antilochus — who turned his firm-paced steeds A little from the track in which they ran — Followed him close. Atrides saw with fear, And shouted to Antilochus aloud :— s*, "Antilochus, thou drivest rashly; rein Thy horses in. The way is narrow here, But soon will broaden, and thou then canst pass. Beware lest with thy chariot-wheels thou dash Against my own, and harm befall us both." v- He spake; but all the more Antilochus Urged on his coursers with the lash, as if He had not heard. As far as flies a quoit Thrown from the shoulder of a vigorous youth Who tries his strength, so far they ran abreast . s30 The horses of Atrides then fell back; He slacked the reins; for much he feared the steeds Would dash against each other in the way, Page 300 300 The Iliad. And overturn the sumptuous cars, and fling The charioteers contending for the prize Upon the dusty track. With angry words The fair-haired Menelaus chided thus: — "Antilochus, there is no man so prone As thou to mischief, and we greatly err, We Greeks, who call thee wise. Go now, and yet Thou shalt not take the prize without an oath." s»» Again he spake, encouraging his steeds: "Check not your speed, nor sorrowfully stand: Their feet and knees will fail with weariness Before your own; they are no longer young." ms He spake; the coursers, honoring his voice. Ran with fresh speed, and soon were near to those Of Nestor's son. Meantime the assembled Greeks Sat looking where the horses scoured the plain And filled the air with dust. Idomeneus, w, The lord of Crete, descried the coursers first, For on a height he sat above the crowd. He heard the chief encouraging his steeds, And knew him, and he marked before the rest A courser, chestnut-colored save a spot sss Upon the middle of the forehead, white, And round as the full moon. And then he stood Upright, and from his place harangued the Greeks:— "O friends, the chiefs and leaders of the Greeks, Am I the sole one that descries the steeds, s*, Or do ye also? Those who lead the race, I think, are not the same, and with them comes Page 301 Book xxnr. 301 A different charioteer. The mares, which late Were foremost, may have somewhere come to harm. I saw them first to turn the goal, and now s«3 I can no more discern them, though my sight Sweeps the whole Trojan plain from side to side. Either the charioteer has dropped the reins, And could not duly round the goal, or else Met with disaster at the turn, o'erthrown, s70 His chariot broken, and the affrighted mares Darting, unmastered, madly from the way. But rise: look forth yourselves. I cannot well Discern, but think the charioteer is one Who, born of an ^Etolian stock, commands s7s Among the Argives, —valiant Diomed, A son of Tydeus, tamer of wild steeds." And Ajax, swift of foot, O.leus* son, Answered with bitter words: "Idomeneus, Why this perpetual prating? Faraway s*, The mares with rapid hoofs are traversing The plain, and thou art not the youngest here Among the Argives, nor hast such sharp eyes Beneath thy brows, yet must thou chatter still. Among thy betters here it ill becomes #s A man like thee to be so free of tongue. The coursers of Eumelus, which at first Outran the rest, are yet before them all, And he is drawing near and holds the reins." The Cretan leader angrily rejoined: "Ajax, thou railer, first in brawls, yet known Page 302 302 The Iliad. As in all else below the other Greeks, A man of brutal mood, come, let us stake A tripod or a caldron, and appoint As umpire Agamemnon, to decide sw Which horses are the foremost in the race, That when thou losest thou mayst be convinced." He spake: Oilean Ajax, swift of foot, Started in anger from his seat, to cast Reproaches back, and long and fierce had been » The quarrel if Achilles had not risen, And said: "No longer let this strife go on, Idomeneus and Ajax! Ill such words Become you; ye would blame in other men What now ye do. Sit then among the rest, «oj And watch the race; for soon the charioteers Contending for the victory will be here, And each of you —for well ye know the steeds Of the Greek chieftains — for himself will see Whose hold the second place, and whose are first.™ He spake: Tydides rapidly drew near, «« Lashing the shoulders of his steeds, and they Seemed in the air as, to complete the course, They flew along, and flung the dust they trod Back on the charioteer. All bright with tin «1s And gold, the car rolled after them; its tires Made but a slender trace in the light dust, So rapidly they ran. And now he stopped Within the circle, while his steeds were steeped In sweat, that fell in drops from neck and breast. «*, This page contains an image. Page 303 Book XX JII. 3°3 Then from his shining seat he leaped, and laid His scourge against the yoke. Brave Sthenelus Came forward, and at once received the prize For Diomed, and bade his comrades lead The maid away, and in their arms bear off The tripod, while himself unyoked the steeds. Next the Neleian chief, Antilochus, Came with his coursers. More by fraud than speed He distanced Menelaus, yet that chief Drave his fleet horses near him. Just so far *m As runs the wheel behind a steed that draws His master swiftly o'er the plain, his tail Touching the tire with its long hairs, and small The space between them as the spacious plain Is traversed, Menelaus just so far as Was distanced by renowned Antilochus. For though at first he fell as far behind As a quoit's cast, yet was he gaining ground Rapidly, now that Agamemnon's mare, JE\\\h the stately maned, increased her speed, **, And Menelaus, had the race for both Been longer, would have passed his rival by, Nor left the victory doubtful. After him, A spear's throw distant, came Meriones, The gallant comrade of Idomeneus, «4s Whose full-maned steeds were slower than the rest, And he unskilled in contests such as these. And last of all Eumelus came. He drew His showy chariot after him, and drave Page 304 304 The Iliad. His steeds before him. Great Achilles saw a* With pity, and from where he stood among The Greeks aduressed him thus with wingd words: — "The ablest horseman brings his steeds the last, But let us, as is just, confer on him The second prize; Tydides takes the first." «ss He spake, and all approved his words; and now The mare, to please the Greeks, had been bestowed Upon Eumelus, if Antilochus, Son of magnanimous Nestor, had not risen To plead for justice with Achilles thus :— «0 "Achilles, I shall deem it grave offence If thou fulfil thy word; for thou wilt take My prize, because thou seest that this man's car And his fleet steeds have suffered injury, Though he be skilful. Yet he should have prayed To the good gods; then had he not been seen om Bringing his steeds the last. But if thou feel Compassion for him, and if so thou please, Large store of brass and gold is in thy tent, And thine are cattle, and handmaidens thine, «»o And firm-paced steeds; hereafter give of these A nobler largess, or bestow it now, And hear the Greeks applaud thee. But this prize I yield not; let the warrior who may claim To take it try with me his strength of arm." »7s He ceased : the noble son of Peleus smiled, And, pleased to see Antilochus succeed, — Page 305 Book xxnr. 30s For he was a beloved friend, — he spake These winged words: "Since, then, Antiiochus, Thou wilt that I bestow some recompense «* Upo:i Eumelus from my store, I give The brazen corselet which my arm in war Took from Asteropaaus, edged around With shining tin, —a gift of no mean price." He ceased, and sent his friend Automedon at To bring it from the tent. He went and brought The corselet, and Eumelus joyfully Received it from Achilles. Then arose, Among them Menelaus, ill at ease, And angry with Antiiochus. He took »* The sceptre from a herald's hand, who hushed The crowd to silence, and the hero spake :— "Antiiochus, who wert till now discreet, What hast thou done? Thou hast disgraced my skill And wronged my steeds by thrusting in thine own, «n Which were less fleet, before them. Now, ye chiefs And leaders of the Achaians, judge between This man and me, and judge impartially, Lest that some warrior of the Greeks should say That Menelaus, having overcome 700 Antiiochus by falsehood, led away The mare a prize; for his were slower steeds, But he the mightier man m feats of arms. Nay, I myself will judge; and none of all The Greeks will censure me, for what I do t0i T Page 306 306 The Iliad. Will be but just. Antilochus, step forth, Illustrious as thou art, and in due form, Standing before thy horses and thy car, And taking in thy hand the pliant scourge Which thou just now hast wielded, touch thy steeds, And swear by Neptune, whose embrace surrounds 71, The earth, that thou hast wittingly employed No stratagem to break my chariot's speed." And thus discreet Antilochus replied: "Have patience with me: I am younger far m Than thou, King Menelaus; thou art both My elder and my better. Thou dost know The faults to which the young are ever prone; The will is quick to act, the judgment weak. Bear with me then. The mare which I received r» I cheerfully make over to thy hands. And if thou wilt yet more of what I have, I give it willingly and instantly, Rather, O loved of Jove, than lose a place In thy good-will, and sin against the gods." 7»s The son of large-souled Nestor, speaking thus, Led forth the mare, and gave her to the hand Of Menelaus, o'er whose spirit came A gladness. As upon a field of wheat Bristling with ears gathers the freshening dew, i*, So was his spirit gladdened iu his breast, And he bespake the youth with winged words : — "Antilochus, now shall my anger cease, For hitherto thou hast not shown thyself Page 307 Book XXIII. 307 Foolish or fickle, though the heat of youth ns Just now hath led thee wrong. In time to come, Beware to practise stealthy arts on men Of higher rank than thou. No other Greek Would easily have made his peace with me. But thou hast suffered much, and much hast done, — Thou, and thy worthy father, and his son, iv Thy brother, — for my sake. I therefore yield To thy petition; yet I give to thee The mare, though mine she be, that these who stand Around us may perceive that I am not 74s Of unforgiving or unyielding mood." He spake, and to Noemon gave the mare,— Noemon, comrade of Antilochus, — To lead her thence, while for himself he took The shining caldron. Then Meriones, w, Fourth in the race, received the prize of gold, — Two talents. But the fifth prize and the last, The double goblet, still was left unclaimed; And this Achilles carried through the crowd Of Greeks, and placed in Nestor's hands, and said:— 73s "Receive thou this, O ancient man, to keep In memory of the funeral honors paid Patroclus, whom thou never more shalt see Among the Greeks. I give this prize, which thou Hast not contended for, since thou wilt wield 7 No more the cestus, nor wilt wrestle more, Nor hurl the javelin at the mark, nor join Page 308 3o8 The Iliad. The foot-race; age lies heavy on thy limbs." He spake, and gave the prize, which Nestor took, Well pleased, and thus with winged words re- plied :— 7«s "Son, thou hast spoken rightly, for these limbs Are strong no longer; neither feet nor hands Move on each side with vigor as of yore. Would I were but as young, with strength as great, As when the Epeians in Buprasium laid ttc King Amarynceus in the sepulchre, And funeral games were offered by his sons 1 Then of the Epeians there was none like me. Nor of the Pylian youths, nor yet among The brave /Etolians. In the boxing-match 77s I took the prize from Clytomedes, son Of Enops, and in wrestling overcame Ancaeus the Pleuronian, who rose up Against me. In the foot-race I outstripped, Fleet as he was, Iphiclus, and beyond Phyleus and Polydore I threw the spear. Only the sons of Actor won the race Against me with their chariot, and they won Through force of numbers. Much they envied me, And feared lest I should bear away the prize; tn For largest in that contest of the steeds Was the reward, and they were two, — one held, Steadily held, the reins, the other swung The lash. Such was I once. Now feats like these Belong to other, younger men, and I, 790 Page 309 Book XXIII. 309 Though eminent among the heroes once, Must do as sad old age admonishes. Go thou, and honor thy friend's funeral With games. Thy gift I willingly accept, Rejoicing that thy thoughts revert to one it* Who loves thee, and that thou forgettest net To pay the honor due to me among The Greeks. The gods will give thee thy reward." He ceased. The son of Peleus, having heard This praise from Nestor, left him, and passed through soo The mighty concourse of the Greeks. He laid Before them prizes for the difficult strife Between the boxers. To the middle space He led a mule, and bound him, six years old And strong for toil, unbroken and most hard *a To break, while to the vanquished he assigned A goblet. Rising, he addressed the host:— "Ye sons of Atreus and ye well-armed Greeks, We call for two of the most skilled to strive For these, by striking with the lifted fist;' &gt;•0 And he to whom Apollo shall decree The victory, acknowledged by you all, Shall have this sturdy mule to lead away. The vanquished takes this goblet as his meed.* He spake. A warrior strong and huge of limb, Skilled in the cestus, named Epeius, son em Of Panopeus, rose at the word, and laid His hand upon the sturdy mule, and said :—- Page 310 The Iliad. "Let him appear whose lot will be to take The goblet. No man of the Grecian host •« Will get the mule by overcoming me In combat with the cestus, — so I deem. In that I claim to be the best man here. And should it not suffice that in the war Others surpass me? All cannot excel s In everything alike. I promise this, And shall fulfil my word, —that I will crush His body, and will break his bones. His frien" Should all remain upon the ground to bear Their comrade off when beaten by my hand." «*, He spake, and all were silent. Only rose Euryalus, whose father was the king Mecisteus of Talaion's line, the same Who went to Thebes and overcame, of old, In all the funeral games of CEdipus, sss The sons of Cadmus. To Euryalus Came Diomed, the spearman, bidding him Expect the victory which he greatly wished His friend might gain. Around his waist he drew A girdle, adding straps that from the hide «40 Of a wild bull were cut with dextrous care. And, fully now arrayed, the twain stepped forth Into the middle space, and both began The combat. Lifting their strong arms, they brought Their heavy hands together. Fearfully Was heard the crash of jaws; from every- limb Page 311 Book XXIII. 3t1 The sweat was streaming. As Euryalus Looked round, his noble adversary sprang And smote him on the cheek, — too rude a blow To be withstood; his shapely limbs gave way «s» Beneath him. As upon the weedy shore, When the fresh north wind stirs the water's face, A fish leaps forth to light, and then again The dark wave covers it, so sprang and fell The chief. Magnanimous Epeius gave s« His hands and raised him up; his friends came round And led him thence with dragging feet, and head That drooped from side to side, while from his mouth Came clotted blood. They placed him in the midst, Unconscious still, and sent and took the cup. st» Then, third in order, for the wrestling-match The son of Peleus brought and showed the Greeks Yet other prizes. To the conqueror A tripod for the hearth, of ample size, He offered; twice six oxen, as the Greeks «.% Esteemed it, were its price. And next he placed In view a damsel for the vanquished, trained In household arts; four beeves were deemed her price. Then rose Achilles, and addressed the Greeks: "Ye who would try your fortune in this strife, e,-o Arise." He spake, and mighty Ajax rose, The son of Telamon, and after him Page 312 3i2 The Iliad. The wise Ulysses, trained to stratagems. They, girding up their loins, came forth and stood In the mid space, and there with vigorous arms «rs They clasped each other, locked like rafters framed By some wise builder for the lofty roof Of a great mansion proof against the winds. Then their backs creaked beneath the powerful strain Of their strong hands; the sweat ran down their limbs; «*• Large whelks upon their sides and shoulders rose, Crimson with blood. Still eagerly they strove For victory and the tripod. Yet in vain Ulysses labored to supplant his foe, And throw him to the ground, and equally », Did Ajax strive in vain, for with sheer strength Ulysses foiled his efforts. When they saw That the Greeks wearied of the spectacle, The mighty Telamonian Ajax said : —- "Son of Laertes, nobly born and trained » To wise expedients, lift me up, or I Will lift up thee; and leave the rest to Jove." He spake, and raised Ulysses from the ground, Who dealt, with ready stratagem, a blow Upon the ham of Ajax, and the limb »k Gave way; the hero fell upon his back, And on his breast Ulysses, while the host Stood wondering and amazed. Ulysses strove, In turn, to lift his rival, but prevailed Page 313 Book XXIII. 313 Only to move him from his place; he caught 990 The knee of Ajax in his own, and both Came to the ground together, soiled with dust. They rose to wrestle still, but from his seat Achilles started, and forbade them thus : — "Contend no longer, nor exhaust your strength 90s With struggling; there is victory for both, And equal prizes. Now depart, and leave The field of contest to the other Greeks." He spake: they listened and obeyed, and wiped The dust away, and put their garments on. «i0 And then the son of Peleus placed in sight Prizes of swiftness, — a wrought silver cup That held six measures, and in beauty far Excelled all others known; the cunning hands Of the Sidonian artisans had given 9is Its graceful shape, and over the dark sea Men of Phoenicia brought it, with their wares, To the Greek harbors; they bestowed it there On Thoas. Afterward Euneiis, son Of Jason, gave it to the hero-chief, s,» Patroclus, to redeem a captive friend, Lycaon, Priam's son. Achilles now Brought it before the assembly as a prize, For which, in honor of the friend he loved, The swiftest runners of the host should strive. « Next, for the second in the race, he showed A noble fatling ox; and for the last, Gold, half a talent. Then he stood and said vol. 11. 14 Page 314 3i4 The Iliad. To the Achaians: "Those who would contend For these rewards, rise up." And then arose 930 Oilean Ajax, fleet of foot; and next Ulysses the sagacious; last upstood Antilochus, the son of Nestor, known As swiftest of the youths. In due array They stood; Achilles showed the goal. At once 93s Forward they sprang. Oilean Ajax soon Gained on the rest, but close behind him ran The great Ulysses. As a shapely maid Flinging the shuttle draws with careful hand The thread that fills the warp, and so brings near »*&gt; The shuttle to her bosom, just so near To Ajax ran Ulysses, in the prints Made by his rival's feet, before the dust Fell back upon them. As he ran, his breath Smote on the head of Ajax. All the Greeks «■ Shouted applause to him, encouraging His ardor for the victory; but when now They neared the goal, Ulysses silently Prayed thus to Pallas: "Goddess, hear my prayer, And help these feet to win.'' The goddess heard, And lightened all his limbs, his feet, his hands; 9s1 And just as they were rushing on the prize, Ajax, in running, slipped and fell — the work Of Pallas — where in heaps the refuse lay From entrails of the bellowing oxen slain 9ss In honor of Patroclus by the hand Of swift Achilles. Mouth and nostrils both Page 315 Book XXIII. Were choked with filth. The much-enduring man Ulysses, coming first, received the cup, While Ajax took the ox, and as he stood 9, Holding the animal's horn and spitting forth The dirt, he said to those around: "T is plain The goddess caused my feet to slide; she aids Ulysses like a mother." So he said, And the Greeks laughed. And then Antilochus tfs Received the third reward, and with a smile Said to the Greeks: "I tell you all, my friends, What you must know already, that the gods Honor the aged ever. Ajax stands Somewhat in years above me, but this chief m Who takes the prize is of a former age And earlier race of men; they call him old, But hard it were for any Greek to vie With him in swiftness, save Achilles here." Such praise he gave Pelides, fleet of foot, Who answered: "Thy good word, Antilochus, Shall not be vainly spoken. I will add Yet half a talent to thy gold." He said, And gave the gold; Antilochus, well pleased, Received it. Then Pelides brought a spear s*, Of ponderous length into the middle space, And laid it down, and placed a buckler near And helmet, which hail been Sarpedon's arms, And which Patroclus won of him in war. Then stood Achilles and addressed the Greeks : — "I call on two, the bravest of the host, *» Page 316 316 The Iliad. To arm themselves and take their spears in hand, And in a contest for these weapons put Each other to the proof. Whoever first Shall wound his adversary, piercing through **, The armor to the delicate skin beneath, And draw the crimson blood, to him I give This beautiful sword of Thrace, with silver studs, Won from Asteropaeus. And let both Bear off these arms, a common gift, and both ws Shall sit and banquet nobly in my tent." He spake, and Telamonian Ajax rose, The large of limb; Tydides Diomed, The strong, rose also. When they had put on Their arms apart from all the host, they came, i00o All eager for the combat, to the lists, And fearful was their aspect. All the Greeks Looked on with dread and wonder, and when now Stood face to face the warriors, thrice they rushed Against each other; thrice they dealt their blows. i90s Then Ajax thrust through Diomed's round shield His weapon, but it wounded not; the mail Beyond it stopped the stroke. Tydides aimed Over his adversary's mighty shield A blow to reach his neck. The Greeks, alarmed ,oio For Ajax, shouted that the strife should cease, And both divide the prize. Achilles heard, But gave to Diomed the ponderous sword, Its sheath, and the fair belt from which it hung. Again Pelides placed before the host 101s Page 317 Book XXIII. 3i7 A mass of iron, shapeless from the forge, Which once the strong Eetion used to hurl; But swift Achilles, when he took his life, Brought it with other booty in his ships To Troas. Rising, he addressed the Greeks : — ,«,, "Stand forth, whoever will contend for this, And if broad fields and rich be his, this mass Will last him many years. The man who tends His flocks, or guides his plough, need not be sent To town for iron; he will have it here." ««»s He spake, and warlike Polypoetes rose. Uprose the strong Leonteus, who in form Was like a god. The son of Telamon Rose also, and Epeius nobly born; Each took his place. Epeius seized the mass, 103. And sent it whirling. All the Achaians laughed. The loved of Mars, Leonteus, flung it next, And after him the son of Telamon, The large-limbed Ajax, from his vigorous arm Sent it beyond the mark of both. But when iom The sturdy warrior Polypoetes took The mass in hand, as far as o'er his beeves A herdsman sends his whirling staff, so far This cast outdid the rest. A shout arose; The friends of sturdy Polypoetes took to*, The prize, and bore it to the hollow ships. Achilles for the archers brought forth steel, Tempered for arrow-heads, — ten axes, each With double edge, and single axes ten, — Page 318 3«8 The Iliad. And from a galley's azure prow took off &gt;,* A mast, and reared it on the sands afar, And, tying to its summit by the foot A timorous dove, he bade them aim at her: "Whoever strikes the bird shall bear away The double axes to his tent; while he »so Who hits the cord, but not the bird, shall take The single axes, as the humbler prize." He ceased, and then arose the stalwart king, Teucer; then also rose Meriones, The valiant comrade of Idomeneus. «css The lots were shaken in a brazen helm, And Teucer's lot was first. He straightway sent A shaft with all his strength, but made no vow Of a choice hecatomb of firstling lambs To Phoebus, monarch-god. He missed the bird, 10«0 Such was the will of Phoebus, but he struck, Close to her foot, the cord that made her fast. The keen shaft severed it; the dove flew up Into the heavens; the fillet dropped to earth Amid the loud applauses of the Greeks. i»es And then Meriones made haste to take The bow from Teucer's hand. Long time he held. The arrow aimed, the while he made a vow To Phoebus, the great archer, promising A chosen hecatomb of firstling lambs; Then, looking toward the dove, as high in air She wheeled beneath the clouds, he pierced her breast Page 319 Book XXIII. 319 Beneath the wing; the shaft went through and fell, Fixed in the ground, beside Meriones, While the bird settled on the galley's mast •07s With drooping head and open wings. The breath Forsook her soon, and down from that high perch She fell to earth. The people all looked on, Admiring and amaze-d. Meriones Took up the double axes as his prize, i0, While Teucer bore the others to the fleet. And then Pelides brought into the midst A ponderous spear, and laid a caldron down Which never felt the fire, inwrought with flowers, Its price an ox. And then the spearmen rose. i«s Atrides Agamemnon, mighty king, First rose, and after him Meriones, The brave companion of Idomeneus; And thus to both the swift Achilles said:— "O son of Atreus, for we know how far ",» Thou dost excel all others, and dost cast The spear with passing strength and skill, bear thou This prize, as victor, to the roomy ships, And if it please thee, let us, as I wish, Give to our brave Meriones the spear." i«n He spake, and Agamemnon, king of men, Complied, and gave Meriones in hand The brazen spear, while to Talthybius, .. The herald, he consigned the greater prize.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
