<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">INTERVIEWS BETWEEN GLAUCUS AND DIOMED, AND HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Successes of the Greeks. — Hector recalled to Troy by Helenus, to appoint a Procession of the Trojan Matrons to the Temple of Minerva. — Meeting of Glaucus and Diomed, who recognize each other as old Friends. — Their Exchange of Weapons. — Meeting of Hector and Andromache, and Return of Hector and Paris to the Field.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-6" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<p>
				<span>NOW from that stubborn conflict of the Greeks And Trojans had the gods withdrawn. The fight Of men encountering men with brazen spears Still raged from place to place upon the plain Between the Xanthus and the Simois. s And first of all did Ajax Telamon, The bulwark of the Achaians, break the ranks Of Troy and raise the hopes of those who fought Beside him; for he smote the bravest man Of all the Thracian warriors, — Acamas, ,0 Son of Eussorus, strong and large of limb. His spear-head, through the plumed helmet's cone Entering the forehead of the Thracian, pierced The bone, and darkness gathered o'er his eyes. The valiant Diomed slew Axylus, 1s The son of Teuthras. To the war he came From nobly-built Arisba; great his wealth, And greatly was he loved, for courteously He welcomed to his house beside the way All comers. None of these could interpose » Between him and his death, for Diomed

Page 152
152 The Iliad. Slew him and his,attendant charioteer, Calysius; both went down below the earth. And then Euryalus struck Dresus down, And smote Opheltius, and went on to slay ?s /Esepus and his brother Pedasus ;— A river-nymph, Abarbareia, bore Both children to Bucolion the renowned. Bucolion was the eldest of the sons Of great Laomedon. His mother reared r The boy in secret. While he fed his sheep, He with the river-nymph was joined in love And marriage, and she bore him twins ; and these, Brave and of shapely limb, Mecisteus' son Struck down, and from their shoulders tore the mail. The warlike Polypoetes overthrew * Astyalus; Ulysses smote to earth Pidytes the Percosian with the spear, And Teucer Aretaon, nobly born. The glittering javelin of Antilochus, *, The son of Nestor, laid Ablerus low; And Agamemnon, king of men, struck down Elatus, who on lofty Pedasus Dwelt, by the smoothly flowing Satnio's stream. Brave Leitus slew Phylacus in flight, « And by Eurypylus Melanthius fell. Then valiant Menelaus took alive Adrastus, whose two coursers, as they scoured The plain in terror, struck against a branch Of tamarisk, and, there entangled, snapped s0

Page 153
Book VI. 153 The chariot pole, and, breaking from it, fled Whither were others fleeing. From the car Adrastus to the dust beside the wheel Fell, on his face. There, lifting his huge spear, Atrides Menelaus o'er him stood. ss Adrastus clasped the warrior's knees and said :— "O son of Atreus, take me prisoner, And thou shalt have large ransom. In the house Of my rich father ample treasures lie, — Brass, gold, and tempered steel, — and he shall send Gifts without end when he shall hear that I Am spared alive and in the Grecian fleet." He spake, and moved the conqueror, who now Was minded to give charge that one among His comrades to the Grecian fleet should lead «s The captive. Agamemnon came in haste, And, lifting up his voice, rebuked him thus :— "O Menelaus, soft of heart, why thus Art thou concerned for men like these? In sooth, Great are the benefits thy household owes 70 The Trojans. Nay, let none of them escape The doom of swift destruction by our hands. The very babe within his mother's womb, Even that must die, and all of Ilium born Perish unburied, utterly cut off." 7s He spake; the timely admonition changed The purpose of his brother, who thrust back The suppliant hero with his hand ; and then King Agamemnon smote him through the loins, 7*

Page 154
The Iliad. And prone on earth he fell. Upon the breast *, Of the slain man Atrides placed his heel, And from the body drew the ashen spear. Then Nestor to the Argives called aloud :— "Friends, Grecian heroes, ministers of Mars! Let no man here through eagerness for spoil * Linger behind the rest, that he may bear Much plunder to the ships; but let us first Strike down our enemies, and afterward At leisure strip the bodies of the dead." Thus speaking, he revived in every breast *, Courage and zeal. Then had the men of Troy Sought refuge from the Greeks within their walls, O'ercome by abject fear, if Helenus, The son of Priam, and of highest note Among the augurs, had not made his way ,» To Hector and /Eneas, speaking thus : — "O Hector and /Eneas, since on you Is laid the mighty labor to command The Trojans and the Lycians, — for the first Are ye in battle, and in council first, — «» Here make your stand, and haste from side to side, Rallying your scattered ranks, lest they betake Themselves to flight, and, rushing to their wives, Become the scorn and laughter of the foe. And then, so soon as ye shall have revived i»s The courage of your men, we here will bide The conflict with the Greeks, though closely pressed; For so we must. But, Hector, thou depart

Page 155
Book VI. To Troy and seek the mother of us both, And bid her call the honored Trojan dames «o To where the blue-eyed Pallas has her fane, In the high citadel, and with a key Open the hallowed doors, and let her bring What she shall deem the fairest of the robes, And amplest, in her palace, and the one She prizes most, and lay it on the knees Of the bright-haired Minerva. Let her make A vow to offer to the goddess there Twelve yearling heifers that have never borne The yoke, if she in mercy will regard ,*, The city, and the wives and little ones Of its defenders; if she will protect Our sacred Ilium from the ruthless son Of Tydeus, from whose valor armies flee, And whom I deem the bravest of the Greeks. "s For not so greatly have we held in dread Achilles, the great leader, whom they call The goddess-born ; but terrible in wrath Is Diomed, nor hath his peer in might." He spake, and Hector of his brother's words ,*, Was not unmindful. Instantly he leaped, Armed, from his chariot, shaking his sharp spears; And everywhere among the host he went, Exhorting them to combat manfully; And thus he kindled the fierce fight anew. 13s They, turning from the flight, withstood the Greeks. The Greeks fell back and ceased to slay; they thought

Page 156
The Iliad. That one of the immortals had come down From out the starry heaven to help the men Of Troy, so suddenly they turned and fought . tm Then Hector to the Trojans called aloud :— "O valiant sons of Troy, and ye allies Summoned from far! Be men, my friends; call back Your wonted valor, while I go to Troy To ask the aged men, our counsellors, ms And all our wives, to come before the gods And pray and offer vows of sacrifice." So the plumed Hector spake, and then withdrew, While the black fell that edged his bossy shield Struck on his neck and ankles as he went. is, Now came into the midst between the hosts Glaucus, the offspring of Hippolochus, And met the son of Tydeus, — both intent On combat. But when now the twain were near, And ready to engage, brave Diomed iss Spake first, and thus addressed his enemy :— "Who mayst thou be, of mortal men? Most brave Art thou, yet never in the glorious fight Have I beheld thee. Thou surpassest now All others in thy daring, since thou com'st Within the reach of my long spear. The sons Of most unhappy men are they who meet My arm ; but — if thou comest from above, A god — I war not with the gods of heaven; For even brave Lycurgus lived not long, The son of Dryas, who engaged in strife

Page 157
Book VI. 157 With the celestial gods. He once pursued The nurses of the frantic Bacchus through The hallowed ground of Nyssa. All at once They flung to earth their sacred implements, 170 Lycurgus the man-slayer beating them With an ox-driver's goad. Then Bacchus fled And plunged into the sea, where Thetis hid The trembler in her bosom, for he shook With panic at the hero's angry threats. m Thenceforward were the blessed deities Wroth with Lycurgus. Him did Saturn's son Strike blind, and after that he lived not long, For he was held in hate by all the gods. So will I never with the gods contend. iso But if thou be indeed of mortal race, And nourished by the fruits of earth, draw near; And quickly shalt thou pass the gates of death." Hippolochus's son, the far-renowned, Made answer thus: "O large-souled Diomed, ^s Why ask my lineage? Like the race of leaves Is that of humankind. Upon the ground The winds strew one year's leaves; the sprouting grove Puts forth another brood, that shoot and grow In the spring season. So it is with man: w One generation grows while one decays. Yet since thou takest heed of things like these, And askest whence I sprang, — although to most My birth is not unknown, — there is a town

Page 158
158 The Iliad. Lapped in the pasture-grounds where graze the steeds ,« Of Argos, Ephyra by name, and there Dwelt Sisyphus bolides, most shrewd Of men; his son was Glaucus, and the son Of Glaucus was the good Bellerophon, To whom the gods gave beauty and the grace Of winning manners. Proetus sought his death And banished him, for Proetus was the chief Among the Argives ; Jupiter had made That people subject to his rule. The wife Of Proetus, nobly-born Anteia, sought *,s With passionate desire his secret.love, But failed to entice, with all her blandishments, The virtuous and discreet Bellerophon. Therefore went she to Proetus with a lie, — "' Die, Proetus, thou, or put Bellerophon »-» To death, for he has offered force to me.' "The monarch hearkened, and was moved to wrath; And then he would not slay him, for his soul Revolted at the deed ; he sent him thence To Lycia, with a fatal tablet, sealed, »ts With things of deadly import writ therein, Meant for Anteia's father, in whose hand Bellerophon must place it, and be made To perish. So at Lycia he arrived Under the favoring guidance of the gods; ™ And when he came where Lycian Xanthus flows,

Page 159
Book VI. 159 The king of that broad realm received his guest With hospitable welcome, feasting him Nine days, and offering up in sacrifice Nine oxen. But when rosy-fingered Morn «s Appeared for the tenth time, he questioned him And bade him show the token he had brought From Proetus. When the monarch had beheld The fatal tablet from his son-in-law, The first command he gave him was, to slay vt, Heaven-born Chimera, the invincible. No human form was hers: a lion she In front, a dragon in the hinder parts, And in the midst a goat, and terribly Her nostrils breathed a fierce, consuming flame ; =33 Yet, trusting in the portents of the gods, He slew her. Then it was his second task To combat with the illustrious Solymi, — The hardest battle he had ever fought — So he declared — with men ; and then he slew — His third exploit — the man-like Amazons. »«i Then he returned to Lycia; on his way The monarch laid a treacherous snare. He chose From his wide Lycian realm the bravest men To lie in ambush for him. Never one ws Of these came home again,.— Bellerophon The matchless slew them all. And when the king Saw that he was the offspring of a god, He kept him near him, giving him to wife His daughter, and dividing with him all »s»

Page 160
16o The Iliad. His kingly honors, while the Lycians set Their richest fields apart — a goodly spot, Ploughlands and vineyards — for the prince to till. And she who now became his wife brought forth Three children to the sage Bellerophon,— »ss Isandrus and Hippolochus; and, last, Laodameia, who in secret bore To all-providing Jupiter a son, — Godlike Sarpedon, eminent in arms. But when Bellerophon upon himself ** Had drawn the anger of the gods, he roamed The Alcian fields alone, a prey to thoughts That wasted him, and shunning every haunt Of humankind. The god whose lust of strife Is never sated, Mars, cut off his son Isandrus, warring with the illustrious race Of Solymi; and Dian, she who guides Her car with golden reins, in anger slew His daughter. I am of Hippolochus; From him I claim my birth. He sent me forth »70 To Troy with many counsels and commands, Ever to bear myself like a brave man, And labor to excel, and never bring Dishonor on the stock from which I sprang, — The bravest stock by far in Ephyra m And the wide realm of Lycia. 'T is my boast To be of such a race and such a blood." He spake. The warlike Diomed was glad, And, planting in the foodful earth his spear,

Page 161
Book VI. 161 Addressed the people's shepherd blandly thus :— "Most surely thou art my ancestral guest; For noble CEneus once within his halls Received the blameless chief Bellerophon, And kept him twenty days, and they bestowed Gifts on each other, such as host and guest *s Exchange; a purple baldric CEneus gave Of dazzling color, and Bellerophon A double golden goblet; this I left Within my palace when I came to Troy. Of Tydeus I remember nothing, since **, He left me, yet a little child, and went To Thebes, where perished such a host of Greeks. Henceforward I will be thy host and friend In Argos; thou shalt be the same to me In Lycia when I visit Lycia's towns; »« And let us in the tumult of the fray Avoid each other's spears, for there will be Of Trojans and of their renowned allies Enough for me to slay whene'er a god Shall bring them in my way. In turn for thee w Are many Greeks to smite whomever thou Canst overcome. Let us exchange our arms, That even these may see that thou and I Regard each other as ancestral guests." Thus having said, and leaping from their cars, 30s They clasped each other's hands and pledged their faith. Then did the son of Saturn take away

Page 162
162 The Iliad. The judging mind of Glaucus, when he gave His arms of gold away for arms of brass Worn by Tydides Diomed, — the worth 31 Of fivescore oxen for the worth of nine. And now had Hector reached the Scaean gates And beechen tree. Around him flocked the wives And daughters of the Trojans eagerly; Tidings of sons and brothers they required, 3^ And friends and husbands. He admonished all Duly to importune the gods in prayer, For woe, he said, was near to many a one. And then he came to Priam's noble hall, — A palace built with graceful porticos, 3*, And fifty chambers near each other, walled With polished stone, the rooms of Priam's'sons And of their wives; and opposite to these Twelve chambers for his daughters, also near Each other; and, with polished marble walls, 3»s The sleeping-rooms of Priam's sons-in-law And their unblemished consorts. There he met His gentle mother on her way to seek Her fairest child, Laodice. She took r*, His hand and held it fast, while thus she spake :— "Why art thou come, my child, and why hast left The raging fight? Full hard these hateful Greeks Press us, in fighting round the city-walls. Thy heart, I know, hath moved thee to repair To our high citadel, and lift thy hands 33s In prayer to Jupiter. But stay thou here

Page 163
Book VL 163 Till I bring pleasant wine, that thou mayst pour A part to Jove and to the other gods, And drink and be refreshed; for wine restores Strength to the weary, and I know that thou 3« Art weary, fighting for thy countrymen." Great Hector of the crested helm replied :— "My honored mother, bring not pleasant wine, Lest that unman me, and my wonted might And valor leave me. I should fear to pour us Dark wine to Jupiter with hands unwashed. Nor is it fitting that a man like me, Defiled with blood and battle-dust, should make Vows to the cloud-compeller, Saturn's son. But thou, with incense, seek the temple reared 3s» To Pallas the despoiler, — calling first Our honored dames together. Take with thee What thou shalt deem the fairest of the robes, And amplest, in thy palace, and the one Thou prizest most, and lay it on the knees vs Of the bright-haired Minerva. Make a vow To offer to the goddess in her fane Twelve yearling heifers that have never borne The yoke, if she in mercy will regard The city, and the wives and little ones y* Of its defenders; if she will protect Our sacred Ilium from the ruthless son Of Tydeus, from whose valor armies flee. So to the shrine of Pallas, warrior-queen, Do thou repair, while I depart to seek s*s

Page 164
164 The Iliad. Paris, if he will listen to my voice. Would that the earth might open where he stands, And swallow him! Olympian Jupiter Reared him to be the bane of all who dwell In Troy, to large-souled Priam and his sons. v Could I behold him sinking to the shades, My heart would lose its sense of bitter woe." He spake. His mother, turning homeward, gave Charge to her handmaids, who through all the town Passed, summoning the matrons, while the queen 3,-3 Descended to her chamber, where the air Was sweet with perfumes, and in which were laid Her rich embroidered robes, the handiwork Of Sidon's damsels, whom her son had brought — The godlike Alexander — from the coast 3* Of Sidon, when across the mighty deep He sailed and brought the high born Helen thence. One robe, most beautiful of all, she chose, To bring to Pallas, ampler than the rest, And many-hued; it glistened like a star, 3ss And lay beneath them all. Then hastily She left the chamber with the matron train. They reached Minerva's temple, and its gates Were opened by Theano, rosy-cheeked, The knight Antenor's wife and Cisseus' child, 390 Made priestess to the goddess by the sons Of Troy. Then all the matrons lifted up Their voices and stretched forth their suppliant hands To Pallas, while the fair Theano took

Page 165
Book VI. The robe and spread its folds upon the lap Of fair-haired Pallas, and with solemn vows Prayed to the daughter of imperial Jove :— "O venerated Pallas, Guardian-Power Of Troy, great goddess! shatter thou the lance Of Diomed, and let him fall in death Before the Scaean gates, that we forthwith May offer to thee in thy temple here Twelve yearling heifers that have never worn The yoke, if thou wilt pity us and spare The wives of Trojans and their little ones." So spake she, supplicating; but her prayer Minerva answered not; and while they made Vows to the daughter of Almighty Jove, Hector was hastening to the sumptuous home Of Alexander, which that prince had built With aid of the most cunning architects In Troy the fruitful, by whose hands were made The bed-chamber and hall and ante-room. There entered Hector, dear to Jove; he bore In hand a spear eleven cubits long: The brazen spear-head glittered brightly, bound With a gold circle. In his room he there Found Paris, busied with his shining arms,— Corselet and shield ; he tried his curved bow; While Argive Helen with the attendant maids Was sitting, and appointed each a task. Hector beheld, and chid him sharply thus : — "Strange man! a fitting time indeed is this,

Page 166
166 The Iliad. To indulge thy sullen humor, while in fight Around our lofty walls the men of Troy vs Are perishing, and for thy sake the war Is fiercely blazing all around our town. Thou wouldst thyself reprove him, shouldst thou see Another warrior as remiss as thou In time of battle. Rouse thee, then, and act, 430 Lest we behold our city all in flames." Then answered Paris of the godlike form :— "Hector! although thou justly chidest me, And not beyond my due, yet let me speak. Attend and hearken. Not in sullenness, os Nor angry with the Trojans, sat I here Within my chamber, but that I might give A loose to sorrow. Even now my wife With gentle speeches has besought of me That I return to battle; and to me «0 That seems the best, for oft doth victory Change sides in war. Remain thou yet awhile, Till I put on my armor; or go thou, And I shall follow and rejoin thee soon." He ended. Hector of the beamy helm «s Heard him, and answered not ; but Helen spake, And thus with soothing words addressed the chief:— "Brother-in-law, — for such thou art, though I Am lost to shame, and cause of many ills, — Would that some violent blast when I was born «0 Had whirled me to the mountain wilds, or waves Of the hoarse sea, that they might swallow me,

Page 167
Book VI. Ere deeds like these were done! But since the gods Have thus decreed, why was I not the wife Of one who bears a braver heart and feels 4ss Keenly the anger and reproach of men? For Paris hath not, and will never have, A resolute mind, and must abide the effect Of his own folly. Enter thou meanwhile, My brother; seat thee here, for heavily *so Must press on thee the labors thou dost bear For one so vile as I, and for the sake Of guilty Paris. An unhappy lot, By Jupiter's appointment, waits us both, — A theme of song for men in time to come." ♦« Great Hector of the beamy helm replied : — "Nay, Helen, ask me not to sit; thy speech Is courteous, but persuades me not. My mind Is troubled for the Trojans, to whose aid I hasten, for they miss me even now. 470 But thou exhort this man, and bid him haste To overtake me ere I leave the town. I go to my own mansion first, to meet My household, — my dear wife and little child; Nor know I whether I may come once more m To them, or whether the great gods ordain That I must perish by the hands of Greeks." So spake the plumed Hector, and withdrew, And reached his pleasant palace, but found not White-armed Andromache within, for she 4«0 Was in the tower, beside her little son

End of Section 6. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section 7
Page 168
168 The Iliad. And well-robed nurse, and sorrowed, shedding tears. And Hector, seeing that his blameless wife Was not within, came forth again, and stood Upon the threshold questioning the maids. 4ss "I pray you, damsels, tell me whither went White-armed Andromache? Has she gone forth To seek my sisters, or those stately dames, My brothers' wives? Or haply has she sought The temple of Minerva, where are met «0 The other bright-haired matrons of the town To supplicate the dreaded deity?" Then said the diligent housewife in reply :— "Since thou wilt have the truth, — thy wife is gone Not to thy sisters, nor those stately dames, 49s Thy brothers' wives ; nor went she forth to join The other bright-haired matrons of the town, Where in Minerva's temple they are met To supplicate the dreaded deity But to the lofty tower of Troy she went s00 When it was told her that the Trojan troops Lost heart, and that the valor of the Greeks Prevailed. She now is hurrying toward the walls, Like one distracted, with her son and nurse." So spake the matron. Hector left in haste sos The mansion, and retraced his way between The rows of stately dwellings, traversing The mighty city. When at length he reached The Sca?an gates, that issue on the field, His spouse, the nobly-dowered Andromache, s»

Page 169
Bonk VL 169 Came forth to meet him, — daughter of the prince Eetion, w ho, among the woody slopes Of Placos, in the Hypoplacian town Of Thebe, ruled Cilicia and her sons, And gave his child to Hector great in arms. s»s She came attended by a maid, who bore A tender child — a babe too young to speak — Upon her bosom, — Hector's only son, Beautiful as a star, whom Hector called Scamandrius, but all else Astyanax, — s»o The city's lord, —since Hector stood the sole Defence of Troy. The father on his child Looked with a silent smile. Andromache Pressed to his side meanwhile, and, all in tears, Clung to his hand, and, thus beginning, said : — s--s "Too brave! thy valor yet will cause thy death. Thou hast no pity on thy tender child, Nor me, unhappy one, who soon must be Thy widow. All the Greeks will rush on thee To take thy life. A happier lot were mine, s0 If I must lose thee, to go down to earth, For I shall have no hope when thou art gone, — Nothing but sorrow. Father have I none, And no dear mother. Great Achilles slew My father when he sacked the populous town «s Of the Cilicians, — Thebe with high gates. T was there he smote Eetion, yet forbore To make his arms a spoil ; he dared not that, But burned the dead with his bright armor on, vol. 1. 8

Page 170
The Iliad. And raised a mound above him. Mountain-nymphs, Daughters of aegis-bearing Jupiter, sw Came to the spot and planted it with elms. Seven brothers had I in my father's house, And all went down to Hades in one day. Achilles the swift-footed slew them all hs Among their slow-paced bullocks and white sheep. My mother, princess on the woody slopes Of Placos, with his spoils he bore away, And only for large ransom gave her back. But her Diana, archer-queen, struck down ss0 Within her father's palace. Hector, thou Art father and dear mother now to me, And brother and my youthful spouse besides. In pity keep within the fortress here, Nor make thy child an orphan nor thy wife sss A widow. Post thine army near the place Of the wild fig-tree, where the city-walls Are low and may be scaled. Thrice in the war The boldest of the foe have tried the spot, — The Ajaces and the famed Idomeneus, s0 The two chiefs born to Atreus, and the brave Tydides, whether counselled by some seer Or prompted to the attempt by their own minds." Then answered Hector, great in war: "All this I bear in mind, dear wife ; but I should stand s:j Ashamed before the men and long-robed dames Of Troy, were I to keep aloof and shun The conflict, coward-like. Not thus my heurt

Page 171
Book VI. 171 Prompts me, for greatly have I learned to dare And strike among the foremost sons of Troy, s70 Upholding my great father's fame and mine; Yet well in my undoubting mind I know The day shall come in which our sacred Troy, And Priam, and the people over whom Spear-bearing Priam rules, shall perish all. s7s But not the sorrows of the Trojan race, Nor those of Hecuba herself, nor those Of royal Priam, nor the woes that wait My brothers many and brave, — who all at last, Slain by the pitiless foe, shall lie in dust, — s», Grieve me so much as thine, when some mailed Greek Shall lead thee weeping hence, and take from thee Thy day of freedom. Thou in Argos then Shalt, at another's bidding, ply the loom, And from the fountain of Messeis draw sss Water, or from the Hypereian spring, Constrained unwilling by thy cruel lot. And then shall some one say who sees thee weep, 'This was the wife of Hector, most renowned Of the horse-taming Trojans, when they fought vr, Around their city.' So shall some one say, And thou shalt grieve the more, lamenting him Who haply might have kept afar the day Of thy captivity. O, let the earth Be heaped above my head in death before sm I hear thy cries as thou art borne away!" So speaking, mighty Hector stretched his arms

Page 172
172 The Iliad. To take the boy; the boy shrank crying back To his fair nurse's bosom, scared to see His father helmeted in glittering brass, And eying with affright the horse-hair plume That grimly nodded from the lofty crest. At this both parents in their fondness laughed; And hastily the mighty Hector took The helmet from his brow and laid it down Gleaming upon the ground, and, having kissed His darling son and tossed him up in play, •Prayed thus to Jove and all the gods of heaven: "O Jupiter and all ye deities, Vouchsafe that this my son may yet become Among the Trojans eminent like me, And nobly rule in Ilium. May they say, 'This man is greater than his father was!' When they behold him from the battle-field Bring back the bloody spoil of the slain foe, — «,s That so his mother may be glad at heart." So speaking, to the arms of his dear spouse He gave the boy; she on her fragrant breast Received him, weeping as she smiled. The chief Beheld, and, moved with tender pity, smoothed &» Her forehead gently with his hand and said : — "Sorrow not thus, beloved one, for me. No living man can send me to the shades Before my time; no man of woman born, Coward or brave, can shun his destiny. fes But go thou home, and tend thy labors there, —

Page 173
Book VI. 173 The web, the distaff, — and command thy maids To speed the work: The cares of war pertain To all men born in Troy, and most to me." Thus speaking, mighty Hector took again «*, His helmet, shadowed with the horse-hair plume, While homeward his beloved consort went, Oft looking back, and shedding many tears. Soon was she in the spacious palace-halls Of the min-queller Hector. There she found «3) A troop of maidens, — with them all she shared Her grief; and all in his own house bewailed The living Hector, whom they thought no more To see returning from the battle-field, Safe from the rage and weapons of the Greeks, w Nor waited Paris in his lofty halls, But when he had put on his glorious arms, Glittering with brass, he traversed with quick steps The city; and as when some courser, fed With barley in the stall, and wont to bathe u; In some smooth-flowing river, having snapped His halter, gayly scampers o'er the plain, And in the pride of beauty bears aloft His head, and gives his tossing mane to stream Upon his shoulders, while his flying feet a* Bear him to where the mares are wont to graze, — So came the son of Priam — Paris — down From lofty Pergamus in glittering arms, And, glorious as the sun, held on his way Exulting and with rapid feet. He found «

End of Section 7. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section 8
Page 174
174 The Iliad. His noble brother Hector as he turned To leave the place in which his wife and he Had talked together. Alexander then — Of godlike form — addressed his brother thus : — "My elder brother! I have kept thee here «*» Waiting, I fear, for me, though much in haste, And came less quickly than thou didst desire." And Hector of the plumed helm replied :— "Strange being, no man justly can dispraise Thy martial deeds, for thou art truly brave. «s But oft art thou remiss and wilt not join The combat. I am sad at heart to hear The Trojans — they who suffer for thy sake A thousand hardships — speak so ill of thee. Yet let us go: we will confer of this ino Another time, if Jove should e'er vouchsafe That to the immortal gods of heaven we pour In our own halls the cup of liberty When we have chased the well-armed Greeks from Troy.'</span>
				</p>
				</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>