<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"/>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-16" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>SUCH was the struggle for that gallant bark. Meanwhile Patroclus stood beside his friend The shepherd of the people, Peleus' son, And shed hot tears, as when a fountain sheds Dark waters streaming down a precipice. s The great Achilles, swift of foot, beheld And pitied him, and spake these winged words : — "Why weepest thou, Patroclus, like a girl, — A little girl that by her mother's side Runs, importuning to be taken up, ,o And plucks her by the robe, and stops her way, And looks at her, and cries, until at last She rests within her arms? Thou art like her, Patroclus, with thy tears. Dost thou then bring Sad tidings to the Myrmidons or me? 's Or hast thou news from Phthia? It is said That still Menoetius, son of Actor, lives, And Peleus also, son of /Eacus, Among the Myrmidons. Full bitterly Should we lament to hear that either died. »0 Or mournest thou because the Achaians fall Through their own folly by the roomy ships? Speak, and hide nothing, for I too would know." And thou, O knight Patroclus, with a sigh Deep drawn, didst answer thus : " Be not displeased, Page 95 Book XVI. 95 Achilles, son of Peleus, bravest far *. Of all the Achaian army! for the Greeks Endure a bitter lot. The chiefs who lale Were deemed their mightiest are within the ships, Wounded or stricken down. There Diomed, », The gallant son of Tydeus, lies, and there Ulysses, the great spearman, wounded both; And Agamemnon ; and Eurypylus, Driven from the field, an arrow in his thigh. Round them the healers, skilled in remedies, ss Attend and dress their painful wounds, while thou, Achilles, sittest here implacable. O, never be such fierce resentments mine As thou dost cherish, who art only brave For mischief! Whom wilt thou hereafter aid, « If now thou rescue not the perishing Greeks? O merciless! it cannot surely be That Peleus was thy father, or the queen Thetis thy mother; the green sea instead And rugged precipices brought thee forth, « For savage is thy heart. But if thou heed The warning of some god, if thou hast heard Aught which thy goddess-mother has received From Jove, send me at least into the war, And let me lead thy Myrmidons, that thus s» The Greeks may have some gleam of hope. And give The armor from thy shoulders. I will wear Thy mail, and then the Trojans, at the sight, May think I am Achilles, and may pause Page 96 96 The Iliad. From fighting, and the warlike sons of Greece, a Tired as they are, may breathe once more, and gain A respite from the conflict. Our fresh troops May easily drive back upon their town The weary Trojans from our tents and fleet." So spake he, sighing ; rash and blind, he asked « Death for himself and evil destiny. Achilles the swift-footed also drew A heavy sigh, and thus in turn he spake :— "What, O divine Patroclus, hast thou said? I fear no omen yet revealed to me; «s Nor has my goddess-mother told me aught From Jove; but ever in my heart and soul Rankles the painful sense of injury done By one who, having greater power, deprives An equal of his right, and takes away 70 The prize he won. This is my wrong, and this The cause of all my bitterness of heart. Her whom the sons of Greece bestowed on me As my reward, a trophy of my spear, After the sack of a fenced city, — her 7s Did Agamemnon, son of Atreus, take Out of my hands, as if I were a wretch, A worthless outcast. But let that affront Be with the things that were. It is not well To bear a grudge forever. I have said My anger should not cease to burn until The clamor of the battle and the assault Should reach the fleet. But go thou and put on Page 97 Book XVI. 97 My well-known armor; lead into the field My Myrmidons, men that rejoice in war, «s Since like a lowering cloud the men of Troy Surround the fleet, and the Achaians stand In narrow space close pressed beside the sea, And all the city of Ilium flings itself Against them, confident of victory, 90 Now that the glitter of my helm no mose Flashes upon their eyes. Yet very soon Their flying host would fill the trenches here With corpses, had but Agamemnon dealt Gently with me; and now their squadrons close ss Around our army. Now no more the spear Is wielded by Tydides Diomed In rescue of the Greeks; no more the shout Of Agamemnon's hated throat is heard; But the man-queller Hector, lifting up «» His voice, exhorts the Trojans, who, in throngs, Raising the war-cry, fill the plain, and drive The Greeks before them. Gallantly lead on The charge, Patroclus; rescue our good ships; Let not the enemy give them to the flames, And cut us off from our desired return. Follow my counsel ; bear my words in mind; So shalt thou win for me among the Greeks Great honor and renown, and they shall bring The beautiful maiden back with princely gifts. "0 When thou hast driven the assailants from the fleet, Return thou hither. If the Thunderer, vol. 11. 5 G Page 98 98 The Iliad. Husband of Juno, suffer thee to gain That victory, seek no further to prolong The combat with the warlike sons of Troy, «s Apart from me, lest I be brought to shame, Nor, glorying in the battle and pursuit, Slaying the Trojans as thou goest, lead Thy men to Troy, lest from the Olympian mount One of the ever-living gods descend i»i Against thee : Phoebus loves the Trojans well. But come as soon as thou shalt see the ships In safety; leave the foes upon the plain Contending with each other. Would to Jove The All-Father, and to Pallas, and the god «s Who bears the bow, Apollo, that of all The Trojans, many as they are, and all The Greeks, not one might be reprieved from death, While thou and I alone were left alive To overthrow the sacred walls of Troy." ,*, So talked they with each other. Ajax, whelmed Beneath a storm of darts, meantime but ill Endured the struggle, for the will of Jove And the fierce foe prevailed. His shining helm Rang fearfully, as on his temples fell, Stroke following after stroke, the weapons hurled Against its polished studs. The buckler borne Firmly on his left arm, and shifted oft From side to side, had wearied it, and yet The Trojans, pressing round him, could not drive, With all their darts, the hero from his place. mi Page 99 Book XVI. 99 Heavily heaved his panting chest; his limbs Streamed with warm sweat; there was no breathing- time; On danger danger followed, toil on toil. Now, Muses, dwellers of Olympus, tell us How first the galleys of the Greeks were fired. Hector drew near, and smote with his huge sword The ashen spear of Ajax just below The socket of the blade, and cut the stem In two. The son of Telamon in vain 1s» Brandished the severed weapon, while afar The brazen blade flew off, and ringing fell To earth. Then Ajax in his mighty mind Acknowledged that the gods were in the war, And shuddered, knowing that the Thunderer iss Was thwarting all his warlike purposes, And willed the victory to Troy. The chief Withdrew beyond the reach of spears, while fast The eager enemy hurled the blazing brands At the swift ship, and wrapped the stern in flames Unquenchable. Achilles saw, and smote -«, His thigh, and spake: "Patroclus, noble friend And knight, make haste: already I behold The flames that rage with fury at the fleet. Now, lest the enemy seize our ships and we Be barred of our return, put quickly on Thy armor; be my task to call the troops." He spake: Patroclus then in glittering brass Arrayed himself; and first around his thighs Page 100 IOO The Iliad. He put the beautiful greaves, and fastened them w Wilh silver clasps; around his chest he bound The breastplate of the swift /Eacides, With star-like points, and richly chased ; he hung The sword with silver studs and blade of brass Upon his shoulders, and with it the shield ,:s Solid and vast; upon his gallant head He placed the glorious helm with horse-hair plume, That grandly waved on high. Two massive spears He took, that fitted well his grasp, but left The spear which great Achilles only bore, ,so Heavy and huge and strong, and which no arm Among the Greeks save his could poise ; his strength Alone sufficed to wield it. 'T was an ash Which Chiron felled in Pelion's top, and gave To Peleus, that it yet might be the death ,*s Of heroes. Then he called, to yoke with speed The steeds, Automedon, whom he esteemed Next to Achilles, that great scatterer Of armies; for he found him ever firm In battle, breasting faithfully its shock. 190 Automedon led forth to take the yoke Xanthus and Balius, coursers that in speed Were like the wind. Podarge brought them forth To Zephyrus, while she, the Harpy, grazed By ocean's streams. Upon the outer side 19s He joined to them the noble Pedasus, Brought by Achilles from the captured town Where ruled Eetion. Though of mortal stock, Page 101 Book XVI. 101 Well might he match with those immortal steeds. Meanwhile Achilles armed the Myrmidons, »», Passing from tent to tent. Like ravening wolves, Terribly strong, that, having slain among The hills an antlered stag of mighty size, Tear and devour it, while their jaws are stained With its red blood, then gather in a herd *,s About some darkly flowing stream, and lap The sullen water with their slender tongues, And drop the clots of blood from their grim mouths, And, although gorged, are fierce and fearless still, — So came the leaders of the Myrmidons, »,» In rushing crowds, about the valiant friend Of swift /Eacides. Among them stood Achilles, great in war, encouraging The charioteers and warriors armed with shields. Achilles, dear to Jupiter, had led »is Fifty swift barks to Ilium, and in each Were fifty men, companions at the oar. O'er these he gave command to five; himself, Supreme in power, was ruler over all. One band the nobly armed Menestheus led, 0*, Son of Spercheius. To that river-god, Beautiful Polydora brought him forth, Daughter of Peleus; she, a mortal maid, Met an immortal's love. Yet Borus, son Of Perieres, owned the boy and took »s The mother for his bride, with princely dower Eudorus led the second band, a youth Page 102 102 The Iliad. Of warlike mould, whom Polymela bore, Daughter of Phylas, graceful in the dance. In secrecy she brought him forth, for once The mighty Argus-queller saw the maid Among the choir of those who danced and sang At Dian's festival, the huntress-queen, Who bears the golden shafts; he saw and loved And, climbing to her chamber, met by stealth 23s The damsel, and she bore a gallant son, Eudorus, swift of foot and brave in war. When Ilithyia, midwife goddess, gave The boy to see the pleasant light of day, The stout Echecleus, son of Actor, brought »*, The mother to his house, with liberal dower. The aged Phylas reared the child she left Tenderly as a son, and loved him well. Pisander, warlike son of Msemalus, Commanded the third squadron ; none like him 34s Among the Myrmidons could wield the spear Except Pelides. Phoenix, aged knight, Led the fourth squadron. With the fifth and last There came Alcimedon, Laerceus' son, As leader. When their ranks were duly formed, »s» Achilles spake to them in earnest words :— "Now, Myrmidons, forget no single word Of all the threats ye uttered against Troy Since first my wrath began. Ye blame me much, And say: 'Hard-hearted son of Peleus, sure «s Thy mother must have suckled thee on gall; Page 103 Book XVI. 103 For sternly thou dost keep us in the ships, Unwilling as we are. We might, at least, Crossing the sea, return in our good ships, If thus thine anger is to last.' These words •*, Ye utter oft when our assemblies meet, And now the great occasion is at hand Which ye have longed for ; now let him whose heart Is fearless meet the Trojans valiantly." He spake, and roused their courage and their might, *s And as they heard their king they brought their rank-, To closer order. As an architect Builds up, with closely fitting stones, the wall Of some tall mansion, proof against the blast, So close were now the helms and bossy shields, »70 Shield leaned on shield, and helm on helm, and man On man, and on the glittering helmet-cones The horse-hair plumes with every motion touched Each other, so compact the squadrons stood. Two heroes, nobly armed, were at their head, to Patroclus and Automedon, and both Had but one thought, — to combat in the van. Entering his tent, Achilles raised the lid Of a fair coffer, beautifully wrought, Which silver-footed Thetis placed on board *&gt;0 His bark, and filled with tunics, cloaks well lined, And fleecy carpets. There he also kept A goblet richly chased, from which no lip Of man, save h'S, m•ght drink the dark red wine, Page 104 104 The Iliad. Nor wine be poured to any god save Jove, »es The mighty Father. This he took, in hand And purified with sulphur first, and then Rinsed with clear water. Next, with washen hands, He drew the dark red wine, and stood without, In the open space, and, pouring out the wine, w Prayed with his eyes turned heavenward, not un- heard By Jupiter, who wields the thunderbolt. "Dodonian Jove, Pelasgian, sovereign King, Whose dwelling is afar, and who dost rule Dodona winter-bound, where dwell thy priests, The Selli, with unwashen feet, who sleep Upon the ground! Thou once hast heard my prayer, And thou hast honored me, and terribly Avenged me on the Greeks. Accomplish yet This one request of mine. I shall remain *» Among the rows of ships, but in my stead I send my comrade, who will lead to war My vast array of Myrmidons. With him, O God of Thunders, send the victory. Make his heart bold; let even Hector learn w Whether my follower, though alone, can wage Successful war, or conquer only then When I go forth with him into the field Of slaughter. When he shall have beaten back The assailants from the fleet, let him return 310 Unharmed to my good galleys and to me. With all his arms and all his valiant men." Page 105 Book XVI. 105 So spake he, offering prayer, and Jupiter, The Great Disposer, hearkened. Half the prayer The All-Father granted him, and half denied: 3's To drive the storm of battle from the fleet He granted, but denied his friend's return In safety. When the warrior thus had prayed, And poured the wine to Father Jove, he went Into his tent again, and there replaced s*, The goblet in the coffer. Coming forth, He stood before the entrance to behold The terrible encounter of the hosts. The newly armed, led by their gallant chief, Patroclus, marched in warlike order forth, 3as And in high hope, to fall upon the foe. As wasps, that by the wayside build their cells, Angered from time to time by thoughtless boys,— Whence mischief comes to many, — if by chance Some passing traveller should unwittingly 3* Disturb them, all at once are on the wing, And all attack him, to defend their young So fearless and so fierce the Myrmidons Poured from their fleet, and mighty was the din. Patroclus with loud voice exhorted them : — «s "O Myrmidons, companions of the son Of Peleus, bear in mind, my friends, your fame For valor, and be men, that we who serve Achilles, we who combat hand to hand, May honor him by our exploits, and teach 340 Wide-ruling Agamemnon how he erred 5* Page 106 1o6 The Iliad. Slighting the bravest warrior of the Greeks." These words awoke the courage and the might Of all who heard them, and in close array They fell upon the Trojans. Fearfully »s The fleet around them echoed to the sound Of Argives shouting. When the Trojans saw, In glittering arms, Menoetius' gallant son And his attendant, every heart grew faint With fear ; the close ranks wavered ; for they thought That the swift son of Peleus at the fleet Had laid aside his wrath, and was again The friend of Agamemnon. Eagerly They looked around for an escape from death. Then first Patroclus cast his shining spear w Into the crowd before him, where they fought Most fiercely round the stern of the good ship Of brave Protesilaus. There it smote Pyrcechmes, who had led from Amydon, On the broad Axius, his Paeonian knights. i* Through his right shoulder went the blade ; he fell, Heavily groaning, to the earth. His band Of warriors from Paeonia, panic-struck, Fled from Patroclus as they saw their chief Cut off, their bravest in the battle-field. 3«s So from the ship he drave the foe, and quenched The blazing fire. There lay the half-burnt bark, While with a mighty uproar fled the host Of Troy, and from between the beaked ships Poured after them with tumult infinite s« Page 107 Book XVI. 107 The Greeks. As when from some high mountain-top The God of Lightnings, Jupiter, sweeps off The overshadowing cloud, at once appear The watch-lowers and the headland heights and lawns All in full light, and all the unmeasured depth 37s Of ether opens, so the Greeks, when thus Their fleet was rescued from the hostile flame, Breathed for a space ; and yet they might not cease From battle, for not everywhere alike Were chased the Trojans from the dark-hulled ships Before the Greeks, but struggled still to keep 3»1 The mastery, and yielded but to force. Then in that scattered conflict of the chiefs Each Argive slew a warrior. With his spear The brave son of Menoetius made a thrust *i At Areilochus, and pierced his thigh, Just as he turned away, and through the part Forced the keen weapon, splintering as it went The bone, and brought the Trojan to the ground; And warlike Menelaus pierced the breast w, Of Thoas where the buckler left it bare, And took his life. The son of Phyleus saw Amphiclus rushing on, and with his spear Met him and pierced his leg below the knee, Where brawniest is the limb. The blade cut through The sinews, and his eyes were closed in night. ws There fought the sons of Nestor. One of these, Antilochus, transfixed with his good spear Page 108 1o8 The Iliad. Atymnius through the flank, and brought him down At his own feet. With sorrow Maris saw 4,» His brother fall, and toward Antilochus Flew to defend the corpse; but ere he strook, The godlike Thrasymedes, with a blow That missed not, smote his shoulder, tearing off With the spear's blade upon the upper arm 4..s The muscles from the bone. With ringing arms He fell, and darkness gathered o'er his eyes. Thus were two brothers by two brothers slain, And sent to Erebus; two valiant friends Were they of King Sarpedon, and the sons »,« Of Amisodarus, who reared and fed Chimera, the destroyer of mankind. O.lean Ajax, springing forward, seized On Cleobulus, for the struggling crowd Hindered his flight. He took the Trojan's life, 41s Smiting the neck with his huge-handled sword; The blade grew warm with blood, and cruel fate Brought darkness o'er the dying warrior's eyes. Peneleus fought with Lycon ; each had cast His spear and missed his aim, and now with swords The twain encountered. Lycon dealt a stroke Upon the crested helmet of his foe, And the blade failed him, breaking at the hilt. Meantime Peneleus smote beneath the ear The neck of Lycon : deep the weapon went; 47s The severed head, held only by the skin, Dropped to one side, and life forsook the limbs. Page 109 Book XVI. Meriones, o'ertaking Acamas, In rapid flight, discharged a mighty blow On his left shoulder as he climbed his car; 4*, He fell, and darkness gathered o'er his eyes. Then plunged Idomeneus the cruel spear Into the mouth of Erymas. The blade Passed on beneath the brain, and pierced the neck, And there divided the white bones. It dashed 4r. The teeth out ; both the eyes were filled with blood, Which gushed from mouth and nostrils as he breathed; And the black cloud of death came over him. Thus every Grecian leader slew his man. As ravening wolves that spring on lambs and kids, And seize them, wandering wide among the hills «, Beyond the keeper's care, and bear them off, And rend with cruel fangs their helpless prey, So fiercely did the Achaians fling themselves Upon the men of Troy, who only thought «s Of flight from that tumultuous strife, and quite Forgot their wonted valor. All the while The greater Ajax sought to hurl his spear At Hector, clad in brazen mail, who yet, Expert in battle, kept his ample chest 4^ Hid by his bull's-hide shield, and, though he heard The hiss of darts and clash of spears, and saw The fortune of the field deserting him, Lingered to rescue his beloved friends. As from the summit of Olympus spreads 43s Page 110 I IO The Iliad. A cloud into the sky that late was clear, When Jove brings on the tempest, with such speed In clamorous flight the Trojans left the fleet, Yet passed they not the trench in seemly plight. The rapid steeds of Hector bore him safe *s0 Across with all his arms, while, left between The high banks of the trench, the Trojan host Struggled despairingly. The fiery steeds, Harnessed to many a chariot, left it there With broken pole. Patroclus followed close, With mighty voice encouraging the Greeks, And meditating vengeance on the foe, That noisily ran on, and right and left Were scattered, filling all the ways. The dust Rose thick and high, and spread, and reached the clouds, 47" As with swift feet the Trojan coursers held Their way to Ilium from the tents and ships. Patroclus where he saw the wildest rout Drave thither, shouting threats. Full many a chief Fell under his own axle from his car, «s And chariots with a crash were overthrown. The swift, immortal horses which the gods Bestowed on Peleus leaped the trench at once, Eager to reach the plain. As eagerly Patroclus longed to overtake and smite t«o Hector, whose steeds were hurrying him away. As when, in autumn time, the dark-brown earth Is whelmed with water from the stormy clouds, Page 111 Book XVI. 111 When Jupiter pours down his heaviest rains, Offended at men's crimes who override 4*s The laws by violence, and drive justice forth From the tribunals, heedless of the gods And their displeasure, — all the running streams Are swelled to floods, — the furious torrents tear The mountain slopes, and, plunging from the heights With mighty roar, lay waste the works of mtn, «, And fling themselves into the dark-blue sea, — Thus with loud tumult fled the Trojan horse. Patroclus, having cut the nearest bands Of Troy in pieces, made his warriors turn «s Back to the fleet, and, eager as they were, Stopped the pursuit that led them toward the town. Then, in the area bounded by the sea, River, and lofty wall, he chased and smote And took full vengeance. With his glittering spear He wounded Pronoiis where the buckler left soi The breast exposed ; the Trojan with a clash Fell to the earth, and life forsook his limbs. Advancing in his might, Patroclus smote Thestor, the son of Enops, as he sat v% Cowering upon his sumptuous seat, o'ercome With fear, and dropped the reins. Through his right cheek Among the teeth Patroclus thrust his spear, And o'er the chariot's border drew him forth With the spear's stem. As when an angler sits v, Upon a jutting rock, and from the sea Page 112 112 The Iliad. Draws a huge fish with line and gleaming hook, So did Patroclus, with his shining spear, Draw forth the panting Trojan from his car, And shook him clear: he fell to earth and died. s•1 As Eryalus then came swiftly on, Patroclus flung a stone, and on the brow Smote him; the Trojan's head, beneath the blow, Parted in two within the helm ; he fell Headlong to earth, a prey to ghastly death. s» Then slew he Erym.is, Amphoterus, Epaltes, Pyris, Ipheus, Echius, Tlepolemus, Damastor's son, and next Euippus; nor was Polymelus spared, The son of Argias, —smitten all, and thrown, s»s Slain upon slain, along their mother earth. And now Sarpedon, as he saw his friends, The unbelted Lycians, falling by the hand Of Menoetiades, exhorted thus The gallant Lycians: "Shame upon you all, s30 My Lycians! whither do you flee? Be bold! For I myself will meet this man, and learn Who walks the field in triumph thus, and makes Such havoc in our squadrons; for his hand H.is laid full miny a gallant warrior low." 3v. He spake, and from his car with all his arms Sprang to the ground, while on the other side Patroclus, as he saw him come, leaped down And left his chariot. As on some tall rock Two vultures, with curved talons and hooked beaks, Page 113 Book XVI. "3 Fight screaming, so these two with furious cries s«i Advanced against each other. When the son Of crafty Saturn saw them meet, his heart Was touched with pity, and he thus bespake His spouse and sister Juno: "Woe is me 1 s4s Sarpedon, most beloved of men, is doomed To die, o'ercome by Menoetiades. And now I halt between two purposes, — Whether to bear him from this fatal fight, Alive and safe, to Lycia's fertile fields, ss0 Or let him perish by his enemy's hand." Imperial, large-eyed Juno answered thus :— "What words, dread son of Saturn, hast thou said! Wouldst thou deliver from the common lot Of death a mortal doomed long since by fate? sss Do as thou wilt, but be thou sure of this, — The other gods will not approve. And bear In mind these words of mine. If thou shouldst send Sarpedon home to Lycia safe, reflect Some other god may claim the right, like thee, s* To rescue his beloved son from death In battle ; for we know that in the war Round Priam's noble city are many sons Of gods, who will with vehement anger see Thy interposing hand. Yet if he be s«3 So dear to thee, and thou dost pity him, Let him in mortal combat be o'ercome By Menoetiades, and when the breath Of life has left his frame, give thou command Page 114 1t4 The Iliad. To Death and gentle Sleep to bear him hence st» To the broad realm of Lycia. There his friends And brethren shall perform the funeral rites; There shall they build him up a tomb, and rear A column, — honors that become the dead." She ceased, nor did the All-Father disregard sn Her words. He caused a bloody dew to fall Upon the earth in sorrow for the son Whom well he loved, and whom Patroclus soon Should slay upon the fertile plain of Troy, Far from the pleasant land that saw his birth. , The warriors now drew near. Patroclus slew The noble Thrasymelus, who had been Sarpedon's valiant comrade in the war. Below the belt he smote him, and he fell Lifeless. Sarpedon threw his shining lance; ss« It missed, but struck the courser Pedasus In the right shoulder. With a groan he fell In dust, and, moaning, breathed his life away. Then the two living horses sprang apart, And the yoke creaked, and the entangled reins s90 Were useless, fastened to the fallen horse. Automedon, the mighty spearman, saw The remedy, and from his brawny thigh He drew his sword, and cut the outside horse Loose from his fellows. They again were brought Together, and obeyed the reins once more; And the two chiefs renewed the mortal fight. And now, again, Sarpedon's shining spear Page 115 Book XVI. "5 Was vainly flung; the point, in passing o'er Patroclus's left shoulder, gave no wound. In turn, Patroclus, hurling not in vain His weapon, smote him where the midriff's web Holds the tough heart. He fell as falls an oak Or poplar or tall pine, which workmen hew Among the mountains with their sharpened steel ,s To frame a ship. So he before his steeds And chariot fell upon the bloody dust, And grasped it with his hands, and gnashed his teeth. As when a lion coming on a herd Seizes, amid the crowd of stamping beeves, A tawny and high-mettled bull, that dies Bellowing in fury in the lion's jaws,— Like him, indignant to be overcome, The leader of the bucklered Lycian host, Laid prostrate by Patroclus, called by name *s His dear companion, and addressed him thus :— "Beloved Glaucus, mighty among men! Now prove thyself a hero, now be bold. Now, if thou have a warrior's spirit, think Of nought but battle. Go from rank to rank, «» Exhorting all the Lycian chiefs to fight Around Sarpedon. Combat thou for me With thy good spear, for I shall be to thee A shame and a reproach through all thy days, If here the Greeks, beside whose ships I fall, ,s Bear off my armor. Stand thou firm, and stir Thy people up to combat valiantly." Page 116 116 The Iliad. While he was speaking, death crept o'er his sight And stopped his breath. Patroclus set his heel Against his bosom, and plucked out the spear; i The midriff followed it, and thus he drew The life and weapon forth at once. Meantime The Myrmidons held fast the snorting steeds, That, loosened from the Lycian's car, were bent On flight. The grief of Glaucus as he heard «33 His comrade's voice was bitter, and his heart Ached at the thought that he could bring no aid. He seized his arm and pressed it in his grasp, For there the wound which Teucer's arrow left, When Glaucus stormed the wall and Teucer's shafts Defended it, still pained him grievously, And thus he prayed to Phoebus, archer-god : — "Give ear, O king! wherever thou abide, In the opulent realm of Lycia, or in Troy; For everywhere thou nearest those who cry ms To thee in sorrow, and great sorrow now Is on me. Grievous is the wound I bear; Sharp are the pains that pierce my hand ; the blood Cannot be stanched ; my very arm becomes A burden; I can wield the spear no more «*, With a firm grasp, nor combat with the foe. A mighty chief— Sarpedon, son of Jove — Has perished, and the father came not nigh To aid his son. Yet come thou to my aid, O monarch-god! and heal this painful wound, «ss And give me strength to rally to the fight Page 117 Book XVI. 117 The Lycian warriors, and myself contend Valiantly for the rescue of the dead." «s« So prayed he: Phoebus hearkened, and at once Assuaged the pain, and stanched the purple blood In the deep w ound, and filled his frame with strength. The warrior felt the change, rejoiced to know That with such friendly speed the mighty god Granted his prayer. And first he went among The Lycian chiefs, exhorting them to wage «s Fierce battle for Sarpedon. Then he sought, Walking with rapid strides, the Trojan chiefs, Agenor, nobly born, Polydamas, The son of Panthoiis, tineas next, And Hector mailed in brass. By him he stood, «n0 And thus accosted him with winged words : — "O Hector, thou art careless of the fate Of thine allies, who for thy sake, afar From those they love, and from their native land, Pour out their lives; thou bringest them no aid. Sarpedon lies in death, the chief who led The bucklered Lycians, who with justice swayed The realm of Lycia, and defended it With valor. Him hath brazen Mars beneath The weapon of Patroclus smitten down. «o Come then, my friends, repulse we gallantly These Myrmidons; else will they bear away His armor and insult his corpse, to avenge The havoc we have made among the Greeks Who perished by our weapons at the fleet." «s Page 118 I 1S The Iliad. He spake, and grief immitigable seized The Trojans; for the slain, though stranger-bom, Had been a pillar of the realm of Troy, And many were the troops that followed him, And he was bravest of them all in war. ««0 Then rushed the Trojans fiercely on the Greeks, With Hector, sorrowing for Sarpedon's fall, Leading them on, while the bold-hearted chief, Patroclus Menoetiades, aroused The courage of the Greeks. He thus addressed «9s The warriors Ajax, eager like himself For combat: "Be it now your welcome task, O warriors Ajax, to drive back the foe; He who first sprang across the Grecian wall, Sarpedon, lies a corpse, and we must now 700 Dishonor the dead chief, and strip from him His armor, and strike down with our good spears Whoever of his comrades shall resist." He spake, and all were resolute to beat The enemy back; and when, on either side, w Trojans and Lycians, Myrmidons and Greeks, Had put their phalanxes in firm array, They closed, with dreadful shouts and horrid clash Of arms, in fight around the dead, while Jove Drew o'er that deadly fray an awful veil t0 Of darkness, that the struggle for the corpse Of his dear son might rage more furiously. The Trojans first drave back the dark-eyed Greeks, For one was in the onset smitten down, Page 119 Book XVI. i Not the least valiant of the Myrmidons, — The son of brave Agacles, nobly born Epeigeus, who aforetime, when he ruled The populous Budeium, having slain A noble kinsman, fled a suppliant To Peleus and the silver-footed queen, Thetis, his consort, and by them was sent, With terrible Achilles, to the coast Of courser-breeding Ilium and the siege Of Troy. As now he stooped to seize the dead, Illustrious Hector smote him with a stone Upon the forehead, cleaving it in two In the strong helmet; headlong on the corse He fell, and cruel death crept over him. With grief Patroclus saw his comrade slain, And broke his way among the foremost ranks. As a swift hawk that chases through the air Starlings and daws, so didst thou dart among Trojans and Lycians, for thy wrath was roused, O knight Patroclus! by thy comrade's death. And now his hand struck Sthenelaus down, The dear son of Ithaemenes; he flung A stone that crushed the sinews of the neck Back drew illustrious Hector, and with him The warriors who were fighting in the van. As far as one can send a javelin, When men contend in martial games, or meet Their deadly enemies in war, so far Withdrew the Trojans, and the Greeks pursued. Page 120 120 The Iliad. The leader of the bucklered Lycian host, Glaucus, was first to turn against his foes. 74s He slew the brave Bathycles, the dear son Of Chalcon, who in Hellas had his home, And was the richest of the Myrmidons. The Lycian, turning on him suddenly As he drew near pursuing, sent his spear 730 Right through his breast, and with a clash he fell. Great was the sorrow of the Greeks to see That valiant warrior fall; the men of Troy Exulted, and pressed round him in a crowd. Nor lacking was the valor of the Greeks, Who met them manfully. Meriones Struck down a Trojan chief, Laogonus, Onetor's valiant son. His father stood Priest at the altar of Idaean Jove, And like a god was honored by the realm. Below the jaw and ear Meriones Smote him, and instantly the life forsook His limbs, and fearful darkness shrouded him. Straight at Meriones ^Eneas aimed His brazen spear to smite him, as he came, Beneath his buckler; but the Greek beheld The weapon in the air, and, stooping low, Escaped it ; over him it passed, and stood Fixed in the earth behind him, where its stem Trembled, for now the rapid steel had spent Its force. As thus it quivered in the ground, yEneas, who perceived that it had left Page 121 Book XVI. 121 His powerful hand in vain, was vexed, and said: "Had I but struck thee, dancer as thou art, Meriones, my spear had suddenly 7-s Ended thy dancing." Then Meriones, The skilful spearman, answered : "Thou art brave, But thou wilt find it hard to overcome The might of all who gather to repulse Thy onset. Thou art mortal, and if I, 7*, Aiming at thee with my good spear, should pierce Thy bosom, valiant as thou art and proud Of thy strong arm, thy death would bring me praise, And send thy soul where gloomy Pluto dwells." He spake ; the brave Patroclus heard, and thus Rebuked him : "Why wilt thou, Meriones, With all thy valor, stand to make a speech? The foe, my friend, will not be forced to leave The corpse by insults ; some of them must die. In deeds the issue of a battle lies; 790 Words are for counsel. Now is not the time To utter swelling phrases, but to fight." He ended, and went on ; the godlike man Followed his steps. As when from mountain dells Rises, and far is heard, a crashing sound 79s Where woodmen fell the trees, such was the noise From those who fought on that wide plain, — the din Of brass, of leather, and of tough bull's-hide Smitten with swords and two-edged spears. No eye, Although of keenest sight, would then have known Noble Sarpedon, covered as he lay, *» vol. 11. 6 Page 122 122 The Iliad. From head to foot, with weapons, blood, and dust; And still the warriors thronged around the dead. As when in spring-time at the cattle-stalls Flies gather, humming, when the milk is drawn, * Round the full pails, so swarmed around the corpse The combatants ; nor once did Jove withdraw His bright eyes from the stubborn fray, but still Gazed, planning how Patroclus should be slain. Uncertain whether, in the desperate strife a,» Over the great Sarpedon, to permit Illustrious Hector with his spear to lay The hero dead, and make his arms a spoil, Or spare him yet a while, to make the war More bloody. As he pondered, this seemed best: That the brave comrade of Achilles first s.« Should put to flight the Trojans and their chief, Hector the brazen-mailed, pursuing them Toward Troy with slaughter. To this end he sent Into the heart of Hector panic fear, **» Who climbed his car and fled, and bade the rest Flee also, for he saw how Jove had weighed The fortunes of the day. Now none remained, Not even the gallant Lycians, when they saw Their monarch lying wounded to the heart ,s Among a heap of slain ; for Saturn's son In that day's strife had caused a multitude To fall in death. Now when the Greeks had stripped Sarpedon of the glittering brazen mail, The brave son of Menoetius bade his friends Page 123 Book XVI. 123 Convey it to the hollow ships. Meanwhile The Cloud-compeller spake to Phoebus thus : — "Go now, beloved Phoebus, and withdraw Sarpedon from the weapons of the foe; Cleanse him from the dark blood, and bear him thence, 933 And lave him in the river-stream, and shed Ambrosia o'er him. Clothe him then in robes Of heaven, consigning him to Sleep and Death, Twin brothers, and swift bearers of the dead, And they shall lay him down in Lycia's fields, a40 That broad and opulent realm. There shall his friends And kinsmen give him burial, and shall rear His tomb and column, — honors due the dead." He spake : Apollo instantly obeyed His father, leaving Ida's mountain height, «4s And sought the field of battle, and bore otf Noble Sarpedon from the enemy's spears, And laved him in the river-stream, and shed Ambrosia o'er him. Then in robes of heaven He clothed him, giving him to Sleep and Death, ?s0 Twin brothers, and swift bearers of the dead, And they, with speed conveying it, laid down The corpse in Lycia's broad and opulent realm. Meantime Patroclus, urging on his steeds And charioteer, pursued, to his own hurt, »ss Trojans and Lycians. Madman! had he then Obeyed the counsel which Pelides gave, Page 124 124 The Iliad. The bitter doom of death had not been his. But stronger than the purposes of men Are those of Jove, who puts to flight the brave, ^ And takes from them the victory, though he Impelled them to the battle; and he now Urged on Patroclus to prolong the fight. Who first, when thus the gods decreed thy death, Fell by thy hand, Patroclus, and who last? w Adrastus first, Autonoiis next, and then Echeclus; then died Perimus, the son Of Meges; then with Melanippus fell Epistor; next was Elasus o'ercome, And Mulius, and Pylartes. These he slew, While all the rest betook themselves to flight. Then had the Greeks possessed themselves of Troy, With all its lofty portals, by the hand And valor of Patroclus, for his rage Was terrible beyond the rage of all s7s Who bore the spear, had not Apollo stood On a strong tower to menace him with ill, And aid the Trojans. Thrice Patroclus climbed A shoulder of the lofty wall, and thrice Apollo, striking his immortal hands '*, Against the glittering buckler, thrust him down; And when, for the fourth time, the godlike man Essayed to mount the wall, the archer-god, Phoebus, encountered him with fearful threats: "Noble Patroclus, hold thy hand, nor deem «ss The city of the warlike Trojans doomed Page 125 Book XVI. 1-5 To fall beneath thy spear, nor by the arm Of Peleus' son, though mightier far than thou." He spake; Patroclus, fearful of the wrath Of the archer-god, withdrew, and stood afar, a* While Hector, at the Sccean gates, restrained His coursers, doubtful whether to renew The fight by mingling with the crowd again, Or gather all his host within the walls By a loud summons. As he pondered thus, «w Apollo stood beside him in the form Of Asius, a young warrior and a brave, Uncle of Hector, the great horse-tamer, And brother of Queen Hecuba, and son Of Dymas, who in Phrygia dwelt beside 9» The streams of the Sangarius. Putting on His shape and aspect, thus Apollo said :— "Why, Hector, dost thou pause from battle thus? Nay, it becomes thee not. Were I in might Greater than thou, as I am less, full soon ,r*i Wouldst thou repent this shrinking from the war. Come boldly on, and urge thy firm-paced steeds Against Patroclus; slay him on the field, And Phoebus will requite thee with renown." He spake, and mingled in the hard-fought fray, 910 While noble Hector bade his charioteer, The brave Cebriones, ply well the lash, And join the battle. Phoebus went before, Entering the crowd, and spread dismay among The Greeks, and gave the glory of the hour 91s Page 126 126 The Iliad. To Hector and the Trojans. Little heed Paid Hector to the rest, nor raised his arm To slay them, but urged on his firm-paced steeds To meet Patroclus, who, beholding him, Leaped from his car. In his left hand he held 9» A spear, and with the other lifting up A white, rough stone, the largest he could grasp, Flung it with all its force. It flew not wide, Nor flew in vain, but smote Cebriones, The warlike chief who guided Hector's steeds, A spurious son of Priam the renowned. The sharp stone smote his forehead as he held The reins, and crushed both eyebrows in ; the bone Resisted not the blow; the warrior's eyes Fell in the dust before his very feet. 930 Down from the sumptuous seat he plunged, as dives A swimmer, and the life forsook his limbs. And this, Patroclus, was thy cruel jest:— "Truly a nimble man is this who dives With such expertness. Were this, now, the sea, 93s Where fish are bred, and he were searching it For oysters, he might get an ample store For many men, in leaping from a ship, Though in a storm, so skilfully he dives Even from the chariot to the plain. No doubt «« There must be divers in the town of Troy." He spake, and sprang upon Cebriones. With all a lion's fury, which attacks The stables and is wounded in the breast, Page 127 Book X17. 127 And perishes through his own daring; thus, mi Patroclus, didst thou fall upon the slain, While Hector, hastening also, left his steeds, And both contended for Cebriones. As lions for the carcass of a deer Fight on a mountain summit, hungry both, w, And both unyielding, thus two mighty men Of war, Patroclus Menuetiades And glorious Hector, eager each to smite His adversary with the cruel spear, Fought for Cebriones. The slain man's head 9ss Was seized by Hector's powerful hand, whose grasp Relaxed not, while Patroclus held the foot; And, thronging to the spot, the other Greeks And Trojans mingled in the desperate strife. As when the east wind and the south contend »*, In the open mountain grounds, and furiously Assail the deep old woods of beech and ash And barky cornel, flinging their long boughs Against each other with a mighty roar, And crash of those that break, so did the Greeks 9«s And Trojans meet with mutual blows, and slay Each other; nor had either host a thought Of shameful flight. Full many a trenchant spear Went to its mark beside Cebriones, And many a winged arrow that had left 970 The bowstring; many a massive stone was hurled Against the ringing bucklers, as they fought Around the dead, while he, the mighty, lay Page 128 128 The Iliad. Stretched on the ground amid the eddying dust, Forgetful of his art of horsemanship. 975 While yet the sun was climbing to his place In middle heaven, the men of either host Were smitten by the weapons, and in both The people fell; but when he stooped to the west The Greeks prevailed, and from that storm of darts And tumult of the Trojans they drew forth «ai Cebriones, and stripped him of his arms. Still rushed Patroclus onward, bent to wreak His fury on the Trojans. Fierce as Mars, He charged their squadrons thrice with fearful shouts, And thrice he laid nine warriors in the dust. 9m But as with godlike energy he made The fourth assault, then clearly was it seen, Patroclus, that thy life was near its end, For Phoebus terribly in that fierce strife 990 Encountered thee. Patroclus saw him not Advancing in the tumult, for he moved Unseen in darkness. Coming close behind, He smote, with open palm, the hero's back Between the ample shoulders, and his eyes ns Reeled with the blow, while Phoebus from his head Struck the tall helm, that, clanking, rolled away Under the horses' feet; its crest was soiled With blood and dust, though never till that hour Had dust defiled its horse-hair plume; for once 100. That helmet guarded an illustrious head, The glorious brows of Peleus' son, and now Page 129 Book XVI. 129 Jove destined it for Hector, to be worn In battle; and his death was also near. The spear Patroclus wielded, edged with brass, io»s Long, tough, and huge, was broken in his hands , And his broad buckler, dropping with its band, Lay on the ground, while Phoebus, son of Jove, Undid the fastenings of his mail. With mind Bewildered, and with powerless limbs, he stood »k, As thunderstruck. Then a Dardanian named Euphorbus, son of Panthous, who excelled His comrades in the wielding of the spear, The race, and horsemanship, approaching, smote Patroclus in the back with his keen spear, 10's Between the shoulder-blades. Already he Had dashed down twenty warriors from their cars, Guiding his own, a learner in the art Of war. The first was he who threw a lance At thee, Patroclus, yet o'ercnme thee not; ,0*, For, plucking from thy back its ashen stem, He fled, and mingled with the crowd, nor dared Await thy coming, though thou wert unarmed, While, weakened by that wound and by the blow Given by the god, Patroclus turned and sought Shelter from danger in the Grecian ranks; But Hector, when he saw the gallant Greek Thus wounded and retreating, left his place Among the squadrons, and, advancing, pierced Patroclus with his spear, below the belt, »» Driving the weapon deep. The hero fell 6» 1 Page 130 13° The Iliad. With clashing mail, and all the Greeks beheld His fall with grief. As when a lion bears A stubborn boar to earth, what time the twain Fight on the mountains for a slender spring, 103s Both thirsty and both fierce, the lion's strength Lays prone his panting foe, so Priam's son Slew, fighting hand to hand, the valiant Greek, Son of Menoetius, who himself had slain So many. Hector gloried over him »o*» With winged words : "Patroclus, thou didst think To lay our city waste, and carry off Our women captive in thy ships to Greece. Madman! in their defence the fiery steeds Of Hector sweep the battle-field, and I, i«j Mightiest of all the Trojans, with the spear Will guard them from the doom of slavery.* Now vultures shall devour thee, wretched youth! Achilles, mighty though he be, has brought No help to thee, though doubtless when he sent 10s0 Thee forth to battle, and remained within, He charged thee thus : ' Patroclus, flower of knights, Return not to the fleet until thy hand Hath torn the bloody armor from the corpse Of the man-queller Hector.' So he spake, 10ss And filled with idle hopes thy foolish heart." Then thou, Patroclus, with a faltering voice, Didst answer thus: " Now, Hector, while thou mayst, Utter thy boast in swelling words, since Jove And Phoebus gave the victory to thee. Page 131 Book XVI. 131 Easily have they vanquished me j 't was they Who stripped the armor from my limbs, for else, If twenty such as thou had met me, all Had perished by my spear. A cruel fate O'ertakes me, aided by Latona's son, 10«s The god, and by Euphorbus among men. Thou who shalt take my spoil art but the third; Yet hear my words, and keep them in thy thought. Not long shalt thou remain alive; thy death By violence is at hand, and thou must fall, '«70 Slain by the hand of great /Eacides." While he was speaking, death stole over him And veiled his senses, while the soul forsook His limbs and flew to Hades, sorrowing For its sad lot, to part from life in youth ,^s And prime of strength. Illustrious Hector thus Answered the dying man : " Why threaten me, Patroclus, with an early death? Who knows That he, thy friend, whom fair-haired Thetis bore, Achilles, may not sooner lose his life, «*, Slain by my spear?" He spake, and set his heel Upon the slain, and from the wound drew forth His brazen spear and pushed the corpse aside, And with the weapon hurried on to smite Godlike Automedon, the charioteer ««s Of swift ^Eacides; but him the steeds Fleet-footed and immortal, which the gods Bestowed on Peleus, swiftly bore away.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
