<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 19</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle"></span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="poem-19" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<p>
				<span>IN saffron-colored mantle from the tides Of Ocean rose the Morning to bring light To gods and men, when Thetis reached the fleet, Bringing the gift of Vulcan. There she found Her son, who, bending o'er Patroclus, wept J Aloud, and all around a troop of friends Lamented bitterly. Beside him stood The glorious goddess, took his hand, and said :— "Leave we the dead, my son, since it hath pleased The gods that he should fall; and now receive 10 This sumptuous armor, forged by Vulcan's hand, Beautiful, such as no man ever wore." The goddess spake, and laid the armor down Before Achilles; as they touched the earth, The well-wrought pieces clanked, and terror seized The Myrmidons. No one among them all Dared fix his gaze upon them; all shrank back. Achilles only, as he saw them, felt His spirit roused within him. In his eyes A terrible brightness flashed, as if of fire. 0• He lifted up the god's magnificent gift Rejoicing, and, when long his eyes had dwelt Delighted on the marvellous workmanship, Thus to his mother said, in winged words : — "A god indeed, my mother, must have given «

Page 192
I g2 The Iliad. These arms, the work of heavenly hands: no man Could forge them. Now I arm myself for war. But for the valiant Menoetiades 1 greatly fear that flies will gather round The wounds inflicted by the spear, and worms Be bred within them, to pollute the corpse Now that the life is gone, and taint the whole." And silver-footed Thetis answered thus: "Son, have no care for that. The task be mine To drive away the importunate swarm that feed On heroes slain in battle. Though it lie The whole year long, the body shall remain Even more than uncorrupted. Call thou now To council all the Achaian chiefs; renounce Thy feud with Agamemnon, king of men, And arm for war, and put on all thy might." She spake, and called a fiery courage up Within the hero's breast. The goddess then Infused ambrosia and the ruddy juice Of nectar through the nostrils of the dead Into the frame, to keep it from decay. Along the beach the great Achilles went, Calling with mighty shouts the Grecian chiefs. Then even they who till that day remained Beside the fleet, — the pilots and the men Who held the helm, the stewards of the ships, And the purveyors, — all made haste to swell The assembly, for they knew that he who long Had borne no part in the disastrous war

Page 193
Book XIX. 193 Had now come forth. Two ministers of Mars, ss The brave Tydides and the nobly born Ulysses, both supported by their spears, Came halting, for their wounds were painful yet; They came and sat among the foremost chiefs. And last came Agamemnon, king of men, «0 Wounded, for he had felt in thick of fight The edge of the sharp spear which Coon bore, Antenor's son. Now when the Greeks were all Assembled, swift Achilles rose and said : — "Atrides, of a truth it would have been «s Better for both of us had we done this At first, though sorely angered, when we strove For a girl's sake so fiercely. Would that she Had perished in my ships, by Dian's shaft, The day on which I laid Lyrnessus waste! 70 So many Greeks would then have not been forced, Slain by the enemy's hand, to bite the dust Of the great earth, while I was brooding o'er My wrath. All that was for the good of Troy And Hector; but the Greeks, I think, will long 7s Remember our contention. Let us leave These things among the things that were, and, though They make us grieve, let us subdue our minds To what the time requires. Here then my wrath Shall end; it is not meet that it should burn »0 Forever.' Hasten thou and rouse to war The long-haired Greeks, that I may yet again vol. 11. 9 M

Page 194
194 The Iliad. Go forth among the men of Troy, and learn If they design to encamp another night Before the fleet. There is among them all No man, I ween, who will not joyfully Sit down when he escapes my deadly spear." He ended, and the Achaians all rejoiced To hear the brave Pelides thus renounce His anger. Agamemnon, king of men, Then rose. He came not forth into the midst, But stood beside his seat, and thus he spake :— "O friends, Achaian heroes, ministers Of Mars! Whoever rises up to speak 'T is well to hear him through, and not break in Upon his speech, else is the most expert Confounded. Who amid a clamorous throng Can listen or can speak? The orator Of clearest voice must utter it in vain. Now I address Pelides; for the rest, Hearken ye all, and ponder what I say. The Greeks speak often of this feud, and cast The blame on me. Yet was I not the cause, But Jupiter and Fate, and she who walks In darkness, dread Erynnis. It was they Who filled my mind with fury in the hour When from Achilles I bore off his prize. What could I do? A deity prevails In all things. Ate, mighty to destroy, Daughter of Jove, and held in awe by all. Delicate are her feet; she never comes

Page 195
Book XIX. Near to the ground, but glides above the heads Of men, to do them harm, and in her net Entangles one at least of two who strive. Jove, deemed the mightiest among men and gods, "s Once felt her power of mischief. Him his spouse, Juno, entrapped by cunning, when within The massive walls of Thebes Alcmena lay In childbed, and the mighty Hercules Was near his birth. For Jupiter had said ,~ Boastfully to the immortals: 'Hear, ye gods And goddesses, what I am moved to speak: This day shall Ilithyia, who presides At births, bring into light a prince whose rule The neighboring tribes shall own; he shall be one Who bears the blood of my illustrious race.' i* "Imperial Juno thus, with words of guile, Made answer: 'What thou sayest will prove false, Nor wilt thou keep thy word. Now swear to me, Olympius, with the irrevocable oath, ,», That whosoever of thy race shall fall This day between a woman's feet shall bear The rule o'er all the neighboring tribes.' She spake, And Jove, perceiving not her craft, complied, And took the mighty oath, but afterward ,a Found himself wronged. For Juno, darting forth, Shot from the Olympian summit, and at once Alighted at Achaian Argos. There She found the noble wife of Sthenelus, The son of Perseus, pregnant with a son, ,4•

Page 196
196 The Iliad. In the seventh month. She caused him to be born, The number of his months yet incomplete, And kept Alcmena's hour of childbirth back, And stayed her pangs. The goddess then made haste To bear the tidings to Saturnian Jove. us O Father Jupiter, by whom are hurled The ruddy lightnings, I have news for thee. A man-child of a generous stock is born, — Eurystheus, whom the Argives shall obey,— Born at this hour to Sthenelus, the son ,*, Of Perseus, who is thine. And well it is That such a prince should rule the Argive race. "She ended: Jupiter was deeply grieved, And, seizing Ate by her shining locks, In his great wrath, he swore a mighty oath, — iss That Aie, whose delight it is to bring Mischief to all, should never tread again Olympus and the starry floor of heaven. Thus having sworn, he swung her, with raised arm, On high, and hurled her from the starry heaven ,*, Downward, where soon she reached the haunts of men; Yet oft in after time because of her He sighed, beholding his beloved son Doomed by Eurystheus to unworthy tasks. So I, while crested Hector in his might i«s Made havoc at our fleet among the Greeks Even by their prows, remembered well my fault.

Page 197
Book XIX. And now since I have borne the penalty, And Jupiter it was who took away My reason, I would gladly make amends »70 With liberal gifts. But rise and join the war; Inflame the courage of the rest; the gifts Will I supply, —all that were promised thee When nobly born Ulysses yesterday Went to thy tents. Or, if it please thee, wait, m Though armed for battle, and my train shall bring The treasures from my ship, that thou mayst see My presents are peace-offerings indeed." The swift of foot, Achilles, answered thus: "Most glorious son of Atreus, king of men! Whether, O Agamemnon, thou wilt give Gifts, as is meet, or keep them, rests with thee. Now let us think of war; it is not well To waste the hour in talking, and put off The mighty work that we have yet to do. i«s Let every Greek among you, as he sees Achilles fighting in the foremost ranks, And slaughtering the Trojan phalanxes, Take heart and boldly combat with his man." And then Ulysses, wise in council, spake, ,*, Answering Achilles: "Nay, thou shouldst not thus, Brave as thou art, lead on the sons of Greece, Yet fasting, to the conflict with the men Of Troy beside their city. No brief space The struggle will endure when once the foes m Rush on each other, and a god inspires

Page 198
198 The Iliad. Both hosts with fury. Bid the Achaians take In their swift galleys food and wine; in these Are force and vigor. No man can endure To combat all the day till set of suri, »» Save with the aid of food, however great The promptings of his valor; for his limbs Grow heavy, thirst and hunger weaken him, And his knees fail him as he walks. Not so The warrior well supplied with food and wine: *», He fights the foe all day; a resolute heart Is in his bosom; nor does weariness O'ertake him till all others leave the field. Now let the people be dismissed awhile, And a repast be ordered. Let the king, »io Atrides, bring huo the assembly here His gifts, that all the Greeks may look on them, And thou rejoice to see them. Let him rise Among the Greeks, and take a solemn oath That he has ne'er approached the maiden's bed »s To claim a husband's right. Thus let thy heart Be satisfied. Yet let the monarch spread A sumptuous banquet in his tent for thee, That thy redress may be complete. And thou, Atrides, wilt hereafter be more just «» To others. It dishonors not a king To make amends to one whom he has wronged." And then King Agamemnon spake in turn: "Son of Laertes, gladly have I heard What thou hast said, and well hast thou discoursed

Page 199
Book XIX. 199 Of all things in their order. I will take . ** The oath of which thou speakest, — so my heart Commands me. In the presence of a god I take it, and commit no perjury. Now let Achilles, though he longs for war, n» Delay awhile; and all assembled here, Remain ye on the ground till from my ship The gifts are brought. This charge and this com- mand I give to thee, Ulysses. Take with thee A band of youths, the noblest of the host, *yi And bring the presents promised yesterday To Peleus' son, and hither let them lead The women. Meantime let Talthybius haste To bring from our broad camp a boar, which I Will offer up to Jove and to the Sun." »-» The swift of foot, Achilles, thus replied: "Most glorious son of Atreus, king of men, These things are for the time when there shall come A pause from battle, and this warlike heat Within my breast shall cool. They whom the spear Of Hector, son of Priam, has o'ercome «4« Lie mangled on the earth, since Jupiter Awarded him the glory of the day : — And ye propose a banquet. I would call The sons of Greece to rush into the war «s» Unfed and fasting, and when this disgrace Shall be avenged, I would, at sunset, spread A liberal feast. Be sure that I, till then,

Page 200
200 The Iliad. Taste neither food nor drink, while my slain friend Lies gashed with weapons in my tent, amidst »ss His sorrowing comrades. Little I regard The things of which thou speakest, for my thoughts Are all of bloodshed and of dying groans." Ulysses, the sagacious, thus rejoined: "Achilles, son of Peleus, bravest far *» Of all the Achaians, mightier with the spear By no small odds than I, yet do I stand In prudence much above thee; I have lived More years, and more have learned. Let then thy mind Accept what I shall say. Men soon become *s Weary of warfare, even when the sword Lays its most ample harvest on the earth. But fewer sheaves are reaped when Jupiter, The arbiter of battles, turns the scale. It is not well that we of Greece should mourn The dead with fasting, since from day to day Our warriors fall in numbers. Where were then Respite from daily fasts? Lay we our slain In earth and moutn a day. We who outlive The cruel combat should refresh ourselves *n With food and wine, that we may steadily Maintain in arms the conflict with the foe. And then let no man idly wait to hear A further call to war, — for it will come Freighted with evil to the man who skulks »*, Among the ships, — but let us all go forth

Page 201
Book XIX. 201 To wage fierce battle with the knights of Troy." He spake, and summoned to his side the sons Of glorious Nestor, and Meriones, And Meges, son of Phyleus, and with them •*-, Thoas, and Lycomedes, Creon's son, And Melanippus. Straight they took their way To Agamemnon's tent, and there their task Was done as quickly as the word was given. *» They brought seven tripods forth, the promised gifts, And twenty burnished caldrons, and twelve steeds, And led away seven graceful women trained In household arts, — the maid with rosy cheeks, Briseis, was the eighth. Ulysses came, Leading the way, and bearing, duly weighed, «w Ten talents, all of gold. The Achaian youths Followed, and placed the presents in the midst Of that assembly. Agamemnon r,ose; And then Talthybius, who was like a god In power of voice, came near and took his place *» Beside the monarch, holding in his hands A boar. The son of Atreus drew a knife, Which hung by the great scabbard of his sword, And, cutting off the forelock of the boar, Prayed with uplifted hands to Jupiter: m Meantime the Greeks in silence kept their seats, And, as became them, listened to the king, Who looked into the sky above, and said : — "Now first bear witness, Jove, of all the gods Greatest and best, and also Earth and Sun, v 9*

Page 202
202 The Iliad. And Furies dwelling under Earth, who take Vengeance on men forsworn, that never I Have laid, for purpose of unchaste desire, Or other cause, my hand upon the maid Briseis. She hath dwelt inviolate sis Within my tents. If yet in aught I say Lurk perjury, then may the blessed gods Heap on my head the many miseries With which they punish those who falsely swear!" He spake, and drew the unrelenting blade 3*, Across the animal's throat. Talthybius took And swung the carcass round, and cast it forth Into the gray sea's depths, to be the food Of fishes. Then again Achilles rose Among the warlike sons of Greece, and said :— m "Great sorrows thou dost send, O Father Jove! Upon mankind; for never would the son Of Atreus have provoked the wrath that burned Within my bosom, never would have thought To bear away the maiden from my tent 330 In spite of me, had it not been the will Of Jupiter that many a Greek should die. But banquet now, and then prepare for war." So spake Achilles, and at once dissolved The assembly, each repairing to his ship m Save the large-hearted Myrmidons, who still Were busy with the gifts, and carried them Toward their great general's galley. These they laid Carefully in the tents, and seated there

Page 203
Book XIX. . 203 The women, while the attentive followers drave w, The coursers to the stables. When the maid Briseis, beautiful as Venus, saw Patroclus lying gashed with wounds, she sprang And threw herself upon the dead, and tore Her bosom, her fair cheeks and delicate neck; 34s And thus the graceful maiden, weeping, said :— "Patroclus, dear to my unhappy heart! I left thee in full life, when from this tent They led me; I return and find thee dead, 0 chieftain of the people! Thus it is b0 That sorrow upon sorrow is my lot. Him to whose arms my father, in my youth, And gracious mother gave me as a bride, 1 saw before our city pierced and slain, And the three brothers whom my mother bore sss Slain also, — brothers whom I dearly loved. Yet thou, when swift Achilles struck to earth My hapless husband, and laid waste the town Of godlike Mynes, wouldst not suffer me To weep despairingly; for thou didst give *» Thy word to make me yet the wedded wife Of great Achilles, bear me in the fleet To Phthia, and prepare the wedding feast Among the Myrmidons. O ever kind! I mourn thy death, and cannot be consoled." #s Weeping she spake; the women wept with her Seemingly for the dead, but each, in truth, For her own griefs. Meanwhile the elders came

Page 204
204 The Iliad. Around Achilles, praying him to join The banquet, but the chief, with sighs, refused. 370 "Dear comrades, if ye love me, do not thus Press me to sit and feast. A mighty woe Weighs down my spirit; it is my resolve To wait and bear until the setting sun." So saying, he dismissed the other kings. vs The sons of Atreus, and the high-born chief Ulysses, Nestor, and Idomeneus, And Phoenix, aged knight, alone remained, And anxiously they sought to comfort him In his great grief; but comfort would he none 3«0 Ere entering the red jaws of war. He drew Deep sighs, and, thinking on Patroclus, spake: "The time has been when thon too, hapless or.e, Dearest of all my comrades, wouldst have spread With diligent speed before me in my tent 13s A genial banquet, while the Greeks prepared For desperate battle with the knights of Troy. Thou liest now a mangled corse, and I, Through grief for thee, refrain from food and drink, Though they are near. No worse calamity 3x, Could light on me, not even should I hear News of my father's death, who haply now Tenderly mourns with tears his absent son In Phthia, while upon a foreign coast I wage for hated Helen's sake the war yn Against the Trojans; or were I to hear Tidings that my beloved son had died,

Page 205
Book XIX. 205 The noble Neoptolemus, who now, If living, is in Scyros, growing up To manhood. Once the hope was in my heart *», That I alone should perish here at Troy, Far from the Argive pastures full of steeds, And thou return to Phthia and bring home My son from Scyros in thy ship, and show The youth my wealth, my servants, and my halls, «s High-roofed and spacious. For my mind misgives That Peleus either lives not, or endures A painful age, and hardly lives, yet waits To hear the sorrowful news that I am slain." So spake he weeping, and the elders sighed 4•» To see his tears, as each recalled to mind Those whom he left at home, while Saturn's son Beheld their grief with pity, and bespake His daughter Pallas thus with winge;! words :— "My child, wilt thou desert that valiant man? 41s And shall Achilles be no mote thy care? Lo, by his ships, before their lofty prows, He sits, lamenting his beloved friend. The rest are at the banquet; he remains Apart from them, and fasting. Hasten thou; 4» With nectar and ambrosial sweets refresh His frame, that hunger overtake him not." As thus he spake he sent the goddess forth Eager to do her errand. Plunging down, In form a shrill-voiced harpy with broad wings, 4»s She cleft the air. The Greeks throughout the camp

Page 206
2o6 The Iliad. Were putting on their armor. She infused Into the hero's frame ambrosial sweets And nectar, that his limbs might not grow faint With hunger. Then the goddess sought again «, The stable mansion of Almighty Jove, While all the Greeks came pouring from the fleet. As when the flakes of snow fall thick from heaven, Driven by the north wind sweeping on the clouds Before it, so from out the galleys came m Helms crowding upon helms that glittered fair, Strong hauberks, bossy shields, and ashen spears. The gleam of armor brightened heaven and earth, And mighty was the sound of trampling feet. Amidst them all the great Achilles stood, «o Putting his armor on; he gnashed his teeth; His eyes shot fire; a grief too sharp to bear Was in his heart, as, filled with rage against The men of Troy, he cased his limbs in mail, The gift of Vulcan, from whose diligent hand «s It came. And first about his legs he clasped The beautiful greaves, with silver fastenings, Fitted the corselet to his bosom next, And from his shoulders hung the brazen sword With silver studs, and then he took the shield, 430 Massive and broad, whose brightness streamed as far . As the moon's rays. And as at sea the light Of beacon, blazing in some lonely spot By night, upon a mountain summit, shines

Page 207
Book XIX. 207 To mariners whom the tempest's force has driven 4ss Far from their friends across the fishy deep, So from that glorious buckler of the son Of Peleus, nobly wrought, a radiance streamed Into the sky. And then he raised and placed Upon his head the impenetrable helm 4*. With horse-hair plume. It glittered like a star, And all the shining tufts of golden thread, With which the maker's hand had thickly set Its cone, were shaken. Next the high-born chief Tried his new arms, to know if they were well *s Adjusted to his shape, and left his limbs Free play. They seemed like wings, and lifted up The shepherd of the people. Then he drew From its ancestral sheath his father's spear, Heavy and huge and tough. No man of all «0 The Grecian host could wield that weapon save Achilles only. T was a Pelian ash, Which Chiron for his father had cut down On Pelion's highest peak, to be the death Of heroes. Meantime, busy with the steeds, 47s Automedon and Alcimus put on Their trappings and their yoke, and round their necks Bound the fair collars, thrust into their mouths The bit, and backward drew the reins to meet The well-wrought chariot. Then Automedon Took in his hand the showy lash, and leaped Into the seat. Behind him, all equipped

Page 208
208 The Iliad. For war, Achilles mounted, in a blaze Of arms that dazzled like the sun, and thus Called to his father's steeds with terrible voice : — "Xanthusand Balius, whom l'odarge bore,— 4» A noble stock, — I charge you to bring back Into the Grecian camp, the battle done, Him whom ye now are bearing to the field, Nor leave him, as ye left Patroclus, dead." «0 Swift-footed Xanthus from beneath the yoke Answered him with bowed head and drooping mane That, flowing through the yoke-ring swept the ground, — For Juno gave him then the power of speech :— "For this one day, at least, we bear thee safe, «s O fiery chief, Achilles! but the hour Of death draws nigh to thee, nor will the blame Be ours; a mighty god and cruel fate Ordain it. Not through our neglect or sloth Did they of Troy strip off thy glorious arms *» From slain Patroclus. That invincible god, The son of golden-haired Latona, smote The hero m the foremost ranks, and gave Glory to Hector. Even though our speed Were that of Zephyr, fleetest of the winds, s0s Yet certain is thy doom to be o ercome In battle by a god and by a man." Thus far he spake, and then the Furies checked His further speech. Achilles, swift of foot, Replied in anger: "Xanthus, why foretell s»

Page 209
Book XX. 209 My death? It is not needed; well I know My fate, — that here I perish, far away From Peleus and my mother. I shall fight Till I have made the Trojans sick of war." He spake, and, shouting to his firm-paced steeds, Drave them, among the foremost, toward the war.</span>
			</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>